The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Ocean World: Being a Description of the Sea and Its Living Inhabitants.
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Ocean World: Being a Description of the Sea and Its Living Inhabitants.

Author: Louis Figuier

Contributor: Charles Ottley Groom Napier

Release date: December 11, 2014 [eBook #47626]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Jane Robins and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OCEAN WORLD: BEING A DESCRIPTION OF THE SEA AND ITS LIVING INHABITANTS. ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Jane Robins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)










THE OCEAN WORLD.

LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING
CROSS.

[Illustration: Plate I.--The Argonaut sailing in the open sea.]




    THE

    OCEAN WORLD:

    BEING A DESCRIPTION OF

    THE SEA AND ITS LIVING INHABITANTS.

    BY
    LOUIS FIGUIER.

    THE CHAPTERS ON CONCHOLOGY REVISED AND ENLARGED
    BY CHARLES O. GROOM-NAPIER, F.G.S., &c.

    WITH 427 ILLUSTRATIONS.

    LONDON:
    CASSELL, PETTER, AND GALPIN;
    AND 596, BROADWAY, NEW YORK.




PREFACE.


"Our Planet is surrounded by two great oceans," says Dr. Maury, the
eminent American _savant_: "the one visible, the other invisible; one is
under foot, the other over head. One entirely envelopes it, the other
covers about two-thirds of its surface." It is proposed in "THE OCEAN
WORLD" to give a brief record of the Natural History of one of those
great oceans and its living inhabitants, with as little of the
nomenclature of Science, and as few of the repulsive details of Anatomy,
as is consistent with clearness of expression; to describe the ocean in
its majestic calm and angry agitation; to delineate its inhabitants in
their many metamorphoses; the cunning with which they attack or evade
their enemies; their instructive industry; their quarrels, their
combats, and their loves.

The learned Schleiden eloquently paints the living wonders of the deep:
"If we dive into the liquid crystal of the Indian Ocean, the most
wondrous enchantments are opened to us, reminding us of the fairy tales
of childhood's dreams. The strangely-branching thickets bear living
flowers. Dense masses of _Meandrineas_ and _Astreas_ contrast with the
leafy, cup-shaped expansions of the _Explanarias_, and the
variously-branching _Madrepores_, now spread out like fingers, now
rising in trunk-like branches, and now displaying an elegant array of
interlacing tracery. The colouring surpasses everything; vivid greens
alternate with brown and yellow; rich tints, ranging from purple and
deepest blue to a pale reddish-brown. Brilliant rose, yellow, or
peach-coloured _Nullipores_ overgrow the decaying masses: they
themselves being interwoven with the pearl-coloured plates of the
_Retipores_, rivalling the most delicate ivory carvings. Close by wave
the yellow and lilac Sea-fans (_Gorgonia_), perforated like delicate
trellis-work. The bright sand of the bottom is covered with a thousand
strange forms of sea-urchins and star-fishes. The leaf-like _Flustræ_
and _Escharæ_ adhere like mosses and lichens to the branches of
coral--the yellow, green, and purple-striped limpets clinging to their
trunks. The sea-anemones expand their crowns of tentacula upon the
rugged rocks or on flat sands, looking like beds of variegated
ranunculuses, or sparkling like gigantic cactus blossoms, shining with
brightest colours.

"Around the branches of the coral shrubs play the humming-birds of the
ocean: little fishes sparkling with red or blue metallic glitter, or
gleaming in golden green or brightest silvery lustre; like spirits of
the deep, the delicate milk-white jelly-fishes float softly through the
charmed world. Here gleam the violet and gold-green Isabelle, and the
flaming yellow, black, and vermilion-striped Coquette, as they chase
their prey; there the band-fish shoots snake-like through the thicket,
resembling a silvery ribbon glittering with rose and azure hue. Then
come the fabulous cuttle-fishes, in all the diaphanous colours of the
rainbow, but with no definite outline.

"When day declines, with the shades of night this fantastic garden is
lighted up with renewed splendour. Millions of microscopic medusæ and
crustaceans, like so many glowing sparks, dance through the gloom. The
Sea-pen waves in a greenish phosphorescent light. Whatever is beautiful
or wondrous among _fishes_, _Echinoderms_, _jelly-fishes_ and _polypi_
and _molluscs_, is crowded into the warm and crystal waters of the
Tropical ocean."

It is stated on the Title-page that "THE OCEAN WORLD" is chiefly
translated from M. Louis Figuier's two most recent works. In justice to
that gentleman, we must explain this statement. The History of the Ocean
is to a large extent, but not wholly, compiled from "La Terre et les
Mers," one of the volumes of M. Figuier's "Tableau de la Nature;" but
the larger portion of the work is a free translation of that author's
latest work, "La Vie et les Moeurs des Animaux." Other chapters, such as
"Life in the Ocean," the chapter on Crustaceans, and some others, are
compiled from various sources; they will not be found in either of M.
Figuier's volumes; but in other respects his text has been pretty
closely followed.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. Figuier's plan is to begin the study of animals with the less perfect
beings occupying the lower rounds of the Zoological ladder, his reason
for doing so being an impression that the presence of the gradually
perfecting animal structure, from the simplest organisms up to the more
perfect forms, was specially calculated to attract the reader. "What can
be more curious or more interesting to the mind," he asks, "than to
examine the successive links in the uninterrupted chain of living beings
which commence with the Infusoria and terminate in Man?"

The work, he hopes, is not without the impress of a true character of
novelty and originality; at least he knows no work in which the strange
habits and special interests of the Zoophytes and Molluscs can be
studied, nor any work in which an attempt is made to represent them by
means of designs at once scientifically correct and attractive from the
picturesque character of the illustrations, most of which have been made
from specimens selected by Monsieur Ch. Bévalet from the various museums
in Paris.

One of those charming plain-speaking children we sometimes meet with
lately said to M. Figuier, "They tell me thou art a vulgariser of
Science. What is that?"

He took the child in his arms, and carried it to the window, where there
was a beautiful rose-tree in blossom, and invited it to pull a rose. The
child gathered the perfumed flower, not without pricking itself cruelly
with the spines; then, with its little hands still bleeding, it went to
distribute roses to others in the room.

"Thou art now a vulgariser," said he to the child; "for thou takest to
thyself the thorns, and givest the flowers to others!"

The parallel, although exaggerated, is not without its basis of truth,
and was probably suggested by the criticism some of his works have met
with; the critics forgetting apparently that these works are an attempt
to render scientific subjects popular, and attractive to the general
reader.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the present edition of "THE OCEAN WORLD" it is only necessary to add
to the above (dated January, 1868), that the work has been revised
throughout, and some not unimportant errors corrected. For several of
these I am indebted to Mr. C. O. G. Napier, who has rearranged the whole
of the Mollusca. Mr. David Grieve has kindly revised and added to the
Crustacea; and to the Messrs. Johnston of Montrose, and Dr. Wilson
Johnston of the Bengal service, I am indebted for some valuable
practical information respecting the salmon and the various modes of
taking it.

    W. S. O.

    _March 1, 1869._




CONTENTS.


                               CHAPTER I.

                                    PAGE
    THE OCEAN                          1
        Depth of the Sea               5
        Colour of the Ocean           11
        Phosphorescence               13
        Saltness of the Sea           15


    CHAPTER II.

    CURRENTS OF THE OCEAN             27
        Trade-winds                   28
        Gulf Stream                   31
        Storms                        32
        Tides                         35
        Polar Seas                    43
        Antarctic Seas                50


    CHAPTER III.

    LIFE IN THE OCEAN                 60


    CHAPTER IV.

    ZOOPHYTES                         68
        Foraminifera                  87
        Infusoria                     97


    CHAPTER V.

    POLYPIFERA                       116


    CHAPTER VI.

    CORALLINES                       119
        Tubiporinæ                   120
        Gorgoniadæ                   121
        Isidians                     124


    CHAPTER VII.

    ZOANTHARIA                       147
        Madreporidæ                  149
        Porites                      162
        Actiniaria                   181
        Minyadinians                 193


    CHAPTER VIII.

    ACALEPHÆ                         195
        Medusadæ                     213
        Rhizostoma                   219
        Vilelladæ                    229
        Ctenophora                   254


    CHAPTER IX.

    ECHINODERMATA                    259
        Asterias                     260
        Crinoidea                    270
        Echinidæ                     280


    MOLLUSCA.

    GENERAL DEFINITION               301


    CHAPTER X.

    MOLLUSCOIDA                      303
        Tunicata                     309
        Ascidians                    309


    CHAPTER XI.

    ACEPHALOUS MOLLUSCA              316


    CHAPTER XII.

    ACEPHALOUS MOLLUSCA              344
        Mytilidæ                     344


    CHAPTER XIII.

    CEPHALOUS MOLLUSCA               391
        Their Characteristics        391


    CHAPTER XIV.

    PULMONARY GASTEROPODS            396
        Limnæidæ                     397
        Buccinidæ                    428
        Purpura                      430
        Pterocera                    439


    CHAPTER XV.

    MOLLUSCOUS PTEROPODS             441


    CHAPTER XVI.

    CEPHALOPODOUS MOLLUSCA           445
        Tentaculifera                445
        Acetabula                    448


    CHAPTER XVII.
    CRUSTACEANS                      477
        General Definition           477
        Crabs and Crayfish           486
        Lobsters                     496


    CHAPTER XVIII.

    FISHES                           502

    CARTILAGINOUS FISHES             508
        Cyclostomata                 508
        Selachia                     510
        Sturiona                     524


    CHAPTER XIX.

    OSSEI, OR BONY FISHES            529
        Plectognathi                 529
        Lophobranchii                534
        Malacopterygii               536
        Abdominales                  560
        Acanthopterygians            590
        Pharyngeans                  596




ILLUSTRATIONS.


    PLATE                                                         PAGE

    I. THE ARGONAUT SAILING BEFORE THE WIND       (_Frontispiece_) 467

    II. SPONGE FISHING ON THE COAST OF SYRIA                        78

    III. CORAL FISHING ON THE COAST OF SICILY                      138

    IV. CORAL ISLAND IN THE POMOTOUAN ARCHIPELAGO                  169

    V. SEA ANEMONES (I.)                                           187

    VI. SEA ANEMONES (II.)                                         189

    VII. AGALMA RUBRA                                              239

    VIII. GALEOLARIA AURANTIACA                                    244

    IX. SEA-URCHINS                                                290

    X. FISHING FOR HOLOTHURIA                                      295

    XI. SYNAPTA DUVERNAEA                                          299

    XII. DREDGING FOR OYSTERS                                      374

    XIII. OYSTER PARKS ON LAKE FUSARO                              376

    XIV. PECTINIDÆ                                                 386

    XV. SPONDYLUS                                                  388

    XVI. ANODONTA                                                  340

    XVII. TRIDACNA GIGANTEA                                        338

    XVIII. VENUS AND CYTHEREA                                      336

    XIX. SOLENIDÆ (_Razor-fish_)                                   333

    XX. TEMPLE OF SERAPIS                                          330

    XXI. CONUS                                                     427

    XXII. CYPRÆADÆ                                                 421

    XXIII. VOLUTA                                                  426

    XXIV. CAPTURE OF A GIGANTIC CUTTLE-FISH                        462

    XXV. SHARK FISHING                                             520

    XXVI. STURGEON FISHING ON THE VOLGA                            528

    XXVII. FISHING FOR ELECTRICAL EELS                             539

    XXVIII. GREENLANDERS FISHING FOR HALIBUT                       551

    XXIX. THE HERRING FISHERY                                      580

    XXX. A ROMAN FEAST                                             593

    XXXI. FISHING FOR TUNNY IN PROVENCE                            598

    XXXII. FISHING FOR MACKEREL OFF THE CORNWALL COAST             601




THE OCEAN WORLD.




CHAPTER I.

THE OCEAN.

Ἄοιστον μὲν ὔδωρ--"The best of all things is
water."--PINDAR.


It is estimated that the sea covers nearly two-thirds of the surface of
the earth. The calculation, as given by astronomers, is as follows: The
surface of the earth is 31,625,625 ½ square miles, that portion
occupied by the waters being about 23,814,121 square miles, and that
consisting of continents, peninsulas, and islands, being 7,811,504
miles; whence it follows that the surface covered with water is to dry
land as 3·8 is to 1·2. The waters thus cover a little more than
seven-tenths of the whole surface. "On the surface of the globe,"
Michelet remarks, "water is the rule, dry land the exception."

Nevertheless, the immensity and depth of the seas are aids rather than
obstacles to the intercourse and commerce of nations; the maritime
routes are now traversed by ships and steamers conveying cargoes and
passengers equal in extent to the land routes. One of the features most
characteristic of the ocean is its continuity; for, with the exception
of inland seas, such as the Caspian, the Dead Sea, and some others, the
ocean is one and indivisible. As the poet says, "it embraces the whole
earth with an uninterrupted wave."

    Περὶ πᾶσαν θ' εἱλισσομένου
    χθόν' ἀκοιμἡτω ῥεύματι.

    ÆSCHYLUS in _Prometheus Vinctus_.

The mean depth of the sea is not very exactly ascertained, but certain
phenomena observed in the movement of tides are supposed to be incapable
of explanation without admitting a mean depth of three thousand five
hundred fathoms. It is true that a great number of deep-sea soundings
fall short of that limit; but, on the other hand, many others reach
seven or eight thousand. Admitting that three thousand fathoms
represents the mean depth of the ocean, Sir John Herschel finds that the
volume of its waters would exceed three thousand two hundred and
seventy-nine million cubic yards.

This vast volume of water is divided by geographers into five great
oceans: the Arctic, the Atlantic, Indian, Pacific, and Antarctic Oceans.

The Arctic Ocean extends from the Pole to the Polar Circle; it is
situated between Asia, Europe, and America.

The Atlantic Ocean commences at the Polar Circle and reaches Cape Horn.
It is situated between America, Europe, and Africa, a length of about
nine thousand miles, with a mean breadth of two thousand seven hundred,
covering a surface of about twenty-five million square miles, placed
between the Old World and the New. Beyond the Cape of Storms, as Cape
Horn may be truly called, it is only separated by an imaginary line from
the vast seas of the south, in which the waves, which are the principal
source of _tides_, have their birth. Here, according to Maury, the young
tidal wave, rising in the circumpolar seas of the south, and obedient to
the sun and moon, rolls on to the Atlantic, and in twelve hours after
passing the parallel of Cape Horn is found pouring its flood into the
Bay of Fundy, whence it is projected in great waves across the Atlantic
and round the globe, sweeping along its shores and penetrating its gulfs
and estuaries, rising and falling in the open sea two or three feet, but
along the shore having a range of ten or twelve feet. Sometimes, as at
Fundy on the American coast; at Brest on the French coast; and Milford
Haven, and the mouth of the Severn in the Bristol Channel, rising and
falling thirty or forty feet, "impetuously rushing against the shores,
but gently stopping at a given line, and flowing back to its place when
the word goes forth, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther.' That
which no human power can repel, returns at its appointed time so
regularly and surely, that the hour of its approach and the measure of
its mass may be predicted with unerring certainty centuries beforehand."

The Indian Ocean is bounded on the north by Asia, on the west by Africa,
on the east by the peninsula of Molucca, the Sunda Isles, and
Australia.

The Pacific, or Great Ocean, stretches from north to south, from the
Arctic to the Antarctic Circle, being bounded on one side by Asia, the
island of Sunda, and Australia; on the other by the west coast of
America. This ocean contrasts in a striking manner with the Atlantic:
the one has its greatest length from north to south, the other from east
to west; the currents of the Pacific are broad and slow, those of the
other narrow and rapid; the waves of this are low, those of the other
very high. If we represent the volume of water which falls into the
Pacific by one, that received by the Atlantic will be represented by the
figure 5. The Pacific is the calmest of seas, and the Atlantic Ocean is
the most stormy.

The Antarctic Ocean extends from the Antarctic Polar Circle to the South
Pole.

It is remarkable that one half of the globe should be entirely covered
with water, whilst the other contains less of water than dry land.
Moreover, the distribution of land and water, if, in considering the
germ of the oceanic basins, we compare the hemispheres separated by the
Equator and the northern and southern halves of the globe, is found to
be very unequal.

Oceans communicate with continents and islands by coasts, which are said
to be scarped when a rocky coast makes a steep and sudden descent to the
sea, as in Brittany, Norway, and the west coast of the British Islands.
In this kind of coast certain rocky indentations encircle it, sometimes
above, sometimes under water, forming a labyrinth of islands, as at the
Land's End, Cornwall, where the Scilly Islands form a compact group of
from one to two hundred rocky islets, rising out of a deep sea; or in
the case of the Channel, on the opposite coast of France, where the
coast makes a sudden descent, forming steep cliffs and leaving an open
sea. The coast is said to be flat when it consists of soft argillaceous
soil descending to the shore with a gentle slope. Of this description of
coast there are two, namely, sandy beaches, and hillocks or dunes.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is the average depth of the sea? It is difficult to give an exact
answer to this question, because of the great difficulty met with in
taking soundings, caused chiefly by the deviations of submarine
currents. No reliable soundings have yet been made in water over five
miles in depth.

Laplace found, on astronomical consideration, that the mean depth of the
ocean could not be more than ten thousand feet. Alexander von Humboldt
adopts the same figures. Dr. Young attributes to the Atlantic a mean
depth of a thousand yards, and to the Pacific, four thousand. Mr. Airy,
the Astronomer Royal, has laid down a formula, that waves of a given
breadth will travel with certain velocities at a given depth, from which
it is estimated that the average depth of the North Pacific, between
Japan and California, is two thousand one hundred and forty-nine
fathoms, or two miles and a half. But these estimates fall far short of
the soundings reported by navigators, in which, as we shall see, there
are important and only recently discovered elements of error. Du Petit
Thouars, during his scientific voyage in the frigate _Venus_, took some
very remarkable soundings in the Southern Pacific Ocean: one, without
finding bottom at two thousand four hundred and eleven fathoms; another,
in the equinoctial region, indicated bottom at three thousand seven
hundred and ninety.

In his last expedition, in search of a north-west passage, Captain Ross
found soundings at five thousand fathoms. Lieutenant Walsh, of the
American Navy, reports a cast of the deep-sea lead, not far from the
American coast, at thirty-four thousand feet without bottom. Lieutenant
Berryman reported another unsuccessful attempt to fathom mid ocean with
a line thirty-nine thousand feet in length. Captain Denman, of H. M. S.
Herald, reported bottom in the South Atlantic at the depth of forty-six
thousand feet; and Lieutenant J. P. Parker, of the United States frigate
_Congress_, on attempting soundings near the same region, let go his
plummet, after it had run out a line fifty thousand feet long, as if the
bottom had not been reached. We have the authority of Lieutenant Maury
for saying, however, that "there are no such depths as these." The
under-currents of the deep sea have power to take the line out long
after the plummet has ceased to sink, and it was before this fact was
discovered that these great soundings were reported. It has also been
discovered that the line, once dragged down into the depths of the
ocean, runs out unceasingly. This difficulty was finally overcome by the
ingenuity of Midshipman Brooke. Under the judicious patronage of the
Secretary to the United States Navy, Mr. Brooke invented the simple and
ingenious apparatus (Fig. 1), by which soundings are now made, in a
manner which not only establishes the depth, but brings up specimens of
the bottom. The sounding-line in this apparatus is attached to a weighty
rod of iron, the lower extremity of which contains a hollow cup for the
reception of tallow or some other soft substance. This rod is passed
through a hole in a thirty-two pound spherical shot, being supported in
its position by slings A, which are hooked on to the line by the swivels
_a_. When the rod strikes the bottom, the tension on the line ceases,
the swivels are reversed, the slings B are thrown out of the hooks, the
ball falls to the ground, and the rod, released from its weight, is
easily drawn up, bringing with it portions of the bottom attached to the
greasy substance in the cup. By means of this apparatus, specimens of
the bottom have been brought up from the depth of four miles.

[Illustration: Fig. 1. Brooke's Sounding Apparatus.]

The greatest depth at which the bottom has been reached with this
plummet is in the North Atlantic between the parallels of thirty-five
and forty degrees north, and immediately south of the great bank of
rocks off Newfoundland. This does not appear to be more than twenty-five
thousand feet deep. "The basin of the Atlantic," says Maury, "according
to the deep-sea soundings in the accompanying diagram, is a long trough
separating the Old World from the New, and extending, probably, from
pole to pole. In breadth, it contrasts strongly with the Pacific Ocean.
From the top of Chimborazo to the bottom of the Atlantic, at the deepest
place yet reached by the plummet in that ocean, the distance in a
vertical line is nine miles."

"Could the waters of the Atlantic be drawn off, so as to expose to view
this great sea gash which separates continents, and extends from the
Arctic to the Antarctic Seas, it would present a scene the most rugged,
grand, and imposing; the very ribs of the solid earth with the
foundations of the sea would be brought to light, and we should have
presented to us in one view, in the empty cradle of the ocean, 'a
thousand fearful wrecks,' with the array of 'dead men's skulls, great
anchors, heaps of pearls, and inestimable stones,' which, in the poet's
eye, lie scattered on the bottom of the sea, making it hideous with the
sight of ugly death."

The depth of the Mediterranean is comparatively inconsiderable. Between
Gibraltar and Ceuta, Captain Smith estimates the depth at about five
thousand seven hundred feet, and from one to three thousand in the
narrower parts of the straits. Near Nice, Saussure found bottom at three
thousand two hundred and fifty. It is said that the bottom is shallower
in the Adriatic, and does not exceed a hundred and forty feet between
the coast of Dalmatia and the mouths of the Po.

The Baltic Sea is remarkable for its shallow waters, its maximum rarely
exceeding six hundred feet.

It thus appears that the sea has similar inequalities to those observed
on land; it has its mountains, valleys, hills, and plains.

The Deep-sea Sounding Apparatus of Lieutenant Brooke has already
furnished some very remarkable results. Aided by it, Dr. Maury has
constructed his fine orographic map of the basin of the Atlantic, which
is probably as exact as the maps which represent Africa or Australia.
Dr. Maury has also published many charts, giving the depths of the
ocean, the substance of which is given in the accompanying map, which
represents the configuration of the Atlantic up to the tenth degree of
south latitude, not in figures, as in Dr. Maury's charts, but in tints;
diagonal lines from right to left, representing the shores of both
hemispheres, indicate a depth of less than a thousand fathoms; from left
to right, indicate bottom at one thousand to two thousand; horizontal
lines, two to three thousand fathoms; cross lines show an average depth
of three to four thousand fathoms; finally, the perpendicular lines
indicate a depth of four thousand fathoms and upwards. Solid black
indicates continents and islands; waving lines, surrounding both
continents at a short distance from the shore, indicate the sands which
surround the coast line at a little distance from the shore.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Chart of the Atlantic Ocean.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The question may be asked, what useful purpose is served by taking
soundings at great depths? To this we may quote the answer of Franklin
to a question of similar tendency, addressed to aeronauts--"What purpose
is served by the birth of a child?" Every fact in physics is interesting
in itself; it forms a rallying point, round which, sooner or later,
others will meet, in order to establish some useful truth; and the
importance of making and recording deep-sea soundings is established by
the successful immersion of the transatlantic telegraph.

At the bottom of the Atlantic there exists a remarkable plateau,
extending from Cape Race in Newfoundland, to Cape Clear in Ireland, a
distance of over two thousand miles, with a breadth of four hundred and
seventy miles: its mean depth along the whole route is estimated at two
miles to two miles and a half. It is upon this telegraphic plateau, as
it has been called, that the attempt was made to lay down the cable in
1858, and it is on it that the enterprise has been so successfully
completed, during the year 1866. Tubular annelids, capable of boring
into all organic substances, are native to this plateau, and have
materially assisted in destroying the electric cable. The surface of the
plateau had been previously explored by means of Brooke's apparatus, and
the bottom was found to be composed chiefly of microscopic calcareous
shells (_Foraminifera_), and a few siliceous shells (_Diatomaceæ_).
These delicate and fragile shells, which seemed to strew the bottom of
the sea, in beds of great thickness, were brought up by the sounding-rod
in a state of perfect preservation, which proves that the water is
remarkably quiet in these depths,--an inference which is fully borne out
by the condition in which the cable of 1858 was found, when picked up in
1866.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. Section of the Atlantic, showing its depth and
the position of the Atlantic Telegraph.]

The first exploration of this plateau was undertaken by the American
brig _Dolphin_, which took a hundred soundings one hundred miles from
the coast of Scotland, afterwards taking the direction of the Azores, to
the north of which bottom was found, consisting of chalk and yellow
sand, at nine thousand six hundred feet. To the south of Newfoundland,
the depth was found to be sixteen thousand five hundred feet. In 1856,
Lieutenant Berryman, of the American steamer _Arctic_, completed a line
of soundings from St. John, Newfoundland, to Valentia, off the Irish
coast, and in 1857, Lieutenant Dayman, of the English steamship
_Cyclops_, repeated the same operation: this last line of soundings,
the result of which is represented in the accompanying section, differed
slightly from that followed by Lieutenant Berryman.

In the Gulf of Mexico, the depth does not seem to exceed seven thousand
feet; the Baltic does not in any place exceed eleven hundred. The depth
of the Mediterranean is, as we have said, very variable. At Nice,
according to Horace de Saussure, the average depth is three thousand
three hundred feet. Between the Dalmatian coast and the mouth of the Po,
bottom is found at a hundred and forty feet. Captain Smith found
soundings at from one thousand to nine thousand feet in the Straits of
Gibraltar, and at ten thousand feet between Gibraltar and Ceuta, where
the breadth exceeds sixteen miles. Between Rhodes and Alexandria, the
greatest depth is ten thousand feet. Between Alexandria and Candia it is
ten thousand three hundred. A hundred and twenty miles east of Malta it
is fifteen thousand. The peculiar form of the Mediterranean has led to
its being compared to a vast inverted tunnel.

The Arctic Ocean has, probably, no great depth. Hence salt water,
following the general law of contracting as it is cooled until it
freezes, no ice can be formed on its surface till the temperature has
fallen through its entire depth nearly to freezing point, when the
entire mass is consolidated into pack-ice. According to Baron Wrangel,
the bottom of the glacial sea, on the north coast of Siberia, forms a
gentle slope, and, at the distance of two hundred miles from the shore,
it is still only from ninety to a hundred feet. Nevertheless, in
Baffin's Bay, Dr. Kane made soundings at eleven thousand six hundred
feet.

The inequalities of the basin of the Pacific Ocean are, comparatively,
unknown to us. The greatest depth observed by Lieutenant Brooke in the
great ocean is two thousand seven hundred fathoms, which he found in
fifty-nine degrees north latitude and one hundred and sixty-six degrees
east longitude. Applying the theory of waves to the billows propelled
from the coast of Japan to California, during the earthquake of the 23rd
of December, 1854, Professor Bache calculated that the mean depth of
this part of the Pacific is fourteen thousand four hundred feet. In the
Pacific Ocean, latitude sixty degrees south and one hundred and sixty
degrees east longitude, he found soundings at fourteen thousand six
hundred feet--about two miles and a half. Another cast of the lead in
the Indian Ocean was made in seven thousand and forty fathoms, but
without bringing up any soil from the bottom. Among the fragments
brought up from the bottom of the Coral Sea, a remarkable absence of
calcareous shells was noted, whilst the siliceous fragments of sponges
were found in great quantities. Other soundings made in the Pacific, at
a depth of four or five miles, were examined by Ehrenberg, who found a
hundred and thirty-five different forms of infusoria represented, and
among them twenty-two species new to him. Generally speaking, the
composition of the infusoria of the Atlantic are calcareous; those of
the Pacific, siliceous. These animalcules draw from the sea the mineral
matter with which it is charged--that is, the lime or silica which form
their shell. These shells accumulate after the death of the animal, and
form the bottom of the ocean. The animals construct their habitations
near the surface; when they die, they fall into the depths of the ocean,
where they accumulate in myriads, forming mountains and plains in mid
ocean. In this manner, we may remark, _en passant_, many of the existing
continents had their birth in geological times. The horizontal beds of
marine deposits, which are called _sedimentary rocks_, and especially
the cretaceous rocks and calcareous beds of the Jurassic and Tertiary
periods, all result from such remains.[1]

The sea level is, in general, the same everywhere. It represents the
spherical form of our planet, and is the basis for calculating all
terrestrial heights; but many gulfs and inland seas open on the east are
supposed to be exceptions to this rule: the accumulation of waters,
pressed into these receptacles by the general movement of the sea from
east to west, it is alleged, may pile up the waters, in some cases, to a
greater height than the general level.

It had long been admitted, on the faith of inexact observation, that the
level of the Red Sea was higher than that of the Mediterranean. It has
also been said that the level of the Pacific Ocean at Panama is higher
by about forty inches than the mean level of the Atlantic at Chagres,
and that, at the moment of high water, this difference is increased to
about thirteen feet, while at low it is over six feet in the opposite
direction. This has been proved, so far as the evidence goes, to be
error in what concerns the difference in level of the Red Sea and
Mediterranean; and the opening of the Suez Canal, which is near at hand,
will probably furnish still more convincing proofs. Recent soundings
show that the mean level of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans are
identical.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been calculated that all the waters of the several seas gathered
together would form a sphere of fifty or sixty leagues in diameter, and,
supposing the surface of the globe perfectly level, that these waters
would submerge it to the depth of more than six hundred feet. Again,
admitting the mean depth of the sea to be thirteen thousand feet, its
estimated contents ought to be nearly two thousand two hundred and fifty
millions of cubic miles of water; and, if the sea could be imagined to
be dried up, all the sewers of the earth would require to pour their
waters into it for forty thousand years, in order to fill the vast
basins anew.

       *       *       *       *       *

If we could imagine the entire globe to be divided into one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-six parts by weight, we should find
approximately, according to Sir John Herschel, that the total weight of
the oceanic waters is equivalent to one of these parts.

The specific weight of sea water is a little above that of fresh water,
the proportion being as a thousand to a thousand and twenty-seven. The
Dead Sea, which receives no fresh water into its bosom to maintain
itself at the same level as other seas, acquires a higher degree of
saltness, and is equal to a thousand and twenty-eight. The specific
gravity of sea water is about the same as the milk of a healthy woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

The colour of the sea is continually varying, and is chiefly caused by
filtration of the solar rays. According to the testimony of the majority
of observers, the ocean, seen by reflection, presents a fine azure blue
or ultramarine (_cæruleum mare_). When the air is pure and the surface
calm this tint softens insensibly, until it is lost and blended with the
blue of the heavens. Near the shore it becomes more of a green or
glaucus, and more or less brilliant, according to circumstances. There
are some days when the ocean assumes a livid aspect, and others when it
becomes a very pure green; at other times, the green is sombre and sad.
When the sea is agitated, the green takes a brownish hue. At sunset, the
surface of the sea is illumined with tints of every hue of purple and
emerald. Placed in a vase, sea water appears perfectly transparent and
colourless. According to Scoresby, the Polar seas are of brilliant
ultramarine blue. Castaz says of the Mediterranean, that it is celestial
blue, and Tuckey describes the equinoctial Atlantic as being of a vivid
blue.

Many local causes influence the colours of marine waters, and give them
certain decided and constant shades. A bottom of white sand will
communicate a greyish or apple-green colour to the water, if not very
deep; when the sand is yellow, the green appears more sombre; the
presence of rocks is often announced by the deep colour which the sea
takes in their vicinity. In the Bay of Loango the waters appear of a
deep red, because the bottom is there naturally red. It appears white in
the Gulf of Guinea, yellow on the coast of Japan, green to the west of
the Canaries, and black round the Maldive group of islands. The
Mediterranean, towards the Archipelago, sometimes becomes more or less
red. The White and Black Seas appear to be named after the ice of the
one and the tempests to which the other is subject.

At other times, coloured animalcules give to the water a particular
tint. The Red Sea owes its colour to a delicate microscopic algæ
(_Trychodesmium erythræum_), which was subjected to the microscope by
Ehrenberg; but other causes of colouration are suggested. Some
microscopists maintain that it is imparted by the shells and other
remains of infusoria; others ascribe the colour to the evaporation which
goes on unceasingly in that riverless district, producing salt rocks on
a great scale all round its shores. In the same manner sea water,
concentrated by the action of the solar rays in the salt marshes of the
south of France, when they arrive at a certain stage of concentration
take a fine red colour, which is due to the presence of some red-shelled
animalcules which only appear in sea water of this strength. The saline
lakes on the Great Thibetian water sheds are due to this cause.
Strangely enough, these minute creatures die when the waters attain
greater density by further concentration, and also if it becomes weaker
from the effects of rain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Navigators often traverse long patches of green, red, white, or yellow
coloured water, all of which are due to the presence of microscopic
crustaceans, medusæ, zoophytes, and marine plants; the Vermilion Sea on
the Californian coast is entirely due to the latter cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

The phenomenon known as _Phosphorescence of the Sea_ is due to analogous
causes. This wonderful sight is observable in all seas, but is most
frequent in the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Gulf, and other tropical seas.
In the Indian Ocean, Captain Kingman, of the American ship _Shooting
Star_, traversed a zone twenty-three miles in length so filled with
phosphorescent animalcules that at seven hours forty-five minutes the
water was rapidly assuming a white, milky appearance, and during the
night it presented the appearance of a vast field of snow. "There was
scarcely a cloud in the heavens," he continues, "yet the sky, for about
ten degrees above the horizon, appeared as black as if a storm were
raging; stars of the first magnitude shone with a feeble light, and the
'Milky Way' of the heavens was almost entirely eclipsed by that through
which we were sailing." The animals which produced this appearance were
about six inches long, and formed of a gelatinous and translucent
matter. At times, the sea was one blaze of light, produced by countless
millions of minute globular creatures, called _Noctilucæ_. The motion of
a vessel or the plash of an oar will often excite their lucidity, and
sometimes, after the ebb of tide, the rocks and seaweed of the coast are
glowing with them. Various other tribes of animals there are which
contribute to this luminous appearance of the sea. M. Peron thus
describes the effect produced by _Pyrosoma Atlanticum_, on his voyage to
the Isle of France: "The wind was blowing with great violence, the night
was dark, and the vessel was making rapid way, when what appeared to be
a vast sheet of phosphorus presented itself floating on the waves, and
occupying a great space ahead of the ship. The vessel having passed
through this fiery mass, it was discovered that the light was occasioned
by animalcules swimming about in the sea at various depths round the
ship. Those which were deepest in the water looked like red-hot balls,
while those on the surface resembled cylinders of red-hot iron. Some of
the latter were caught: they were found to vary in size from three to
seven inches. All the exterior of the creatures bristled with long thick
tubercles, shining like so many diamonds, and these seemed to be the
principal seat of their luminosity. Inside also there appeared to be a
multitude of oblong narrow glands, exhibiting a high degree of
phosphoric power. The colour of these animals when in repose is an opal
yellow, mixed with green; but, on the slightest movement, the animal
exhibits a spontaneous contractile power, and assumes a luminous
brilliancy, passing through various shades of deep red, orange, green,
and azure blue."

The phosphorescence of the sea is a spectacle at once imposing and
magnificent. The ship, in plunging through the waves, seems to advance
through a sea of red and blue flame, which is thrown off by the keel
like so much lightning. Myriads of creatures float and play on the
surface of the waves, dividing, multiplying, and reuniting, so as to
form one vast field of fire. In stormy weather the luminous waves roll
and break in a silvery foam. Glittering bodies, which might be taken for
fire-fishes, seem to pursue and catch each other--lose their hold, and
dart after each other anew. From time immemorial, the phosphorescence of
the sea has been observed by navigators. The luminous appearance
presents itself on the crest of the waves, which in falling scatters it
in all directions. It attaches itself to the rudder and dashes against
the bows of the vessel. It plays round the reefs and rocks against which
the waves beat, and on silent nights, in the tropics, its effects are
truly magical. This phosphorescence is due chiefly to the presence of a
multitude of mollusks and zoophytes which seem to shine by their own
light; they emit a fluid so susceptible of expansion, that in the zigzag
movement pursued they leave a luminous train upon the water, which
spreads with immense rapidity. One of the most remarkable of these
minute mollusks is a species of _Pyrosoma_, a sort of mucous sac of an
inch long, which, thrown upon the deck of a ship, emits a light like a
rod of iron heated to a white heat. Sir John Herschel noted on the
surface of calm water a very curious form of this phosphorescence; it
was a polygon of rectilinear shape, covering many square feet of
surface, and it illuminated the whole region for some moments with a
vivid light, which traversed it with great rapidity.

The phosphorescence of the sea may also result from another cause. When
animal matter is decomposed, it becomes phosphorescent. The bodies of
certain fishes, when they become a prey to putrefaction, emit an intense
light. MM. Becquerel and Breschet have noted fine phosphorescent effects
from this cause in the waters of the Brenta at Venice. Animal matter in
a state of decomposition, proceeding from dead fish which floats on the
surface of ponds, is capable of producing large patches of oleaginous
matter, which, piled upon the water, communicates to a considerable
extent the phosphorescent aspect.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whatever may be the case elsewhere, there are local causes which affect
the colour of the waters in certain rivers, and even originate their
names. The Guaïnia, which with the Casiquaire forms the Rio Negro, is of
a deep brown, which scarcely interferes with the limpidity of its
waters. The waters of the Orinoco and the Casiquaire have also a
brownish colour. The Ganges is of a muddy brown, while the Djumna, which
it receives, is green or blue. The whitish colour belongs to the Rio
Bianco, or White River, and to many other rivers. The Ohio in America,
the Torgedale, the Goetha, the Traun at Ischl, and most of the Norwegian
rivers, are of a delicate limpid green. The Yellow River and the Blue
River in China are distinguished by the characteristic tint of their
waters. The Arkansas, the Red River, and the Lobregat in Catalonia, are
remarkable for their red colour, which, like the Dart and other English
rivers, they owe to the earth over which they flow, or which their
waters hold in suspension.

       *       *       *       *       *

The water of the sea is essentially _salt_, of a peculiar flavour,
slightly acrid and bitter, and a little nauseous. It has an odour
perfectly _sui generis_, and is slightly viscous. In short, it includes
a great number of mineral salts and some other compounds, which give it
a very disagreeable taste, and render it unfit for domestic use. It
contains nearly all the soluble substances which exist on the globe, but
principally chloride of sodium, or marine salt, and sulphate of
magnesia, of potassium, and of lime.

Pure water is produced by a combination of one volume of oxygen and of
two volumes of hydrogen, or in weight, 100 oxygen and 12·50 hydrogen.
Sea water is composed of the same; but we find there, besides, other
elements, the presence of which chemistry reveals to us. In 1000 grains
of sea water the following ingredients are found:--

    Water                             962·0
    Chloride of sodium                 27·1
    Chloride of magnesium               5·4
    Chloride of potassium               0·4
    Bromide of magnesia                 0·1
    Sulphate of magnesia                1·2
    Sulphate of lime                    0·8
    Carbonate of lime                   0·1
              Leaving a residuum of     2·9
                                      -----
                                       1000
                                      =====

consisting of sulphuretted hydrogen, hydrochlorate of ammonia, iodine
iron, copper, and even silver in various quantities and proportions,
according to the locality of the specimen. In examining the plates of
copper taken from the bottom of a ship at Valparaiso, which had been
long at sea, distinct traces of silver were found deposited by the sea.
Finally, we find dissolved in the ocean a peculiar mucus, which seems of
a mixed animal and vegetable nature, and is evidently organic matter
proceeding from the successive decomposition of the innumerable
generations of animals which have disappeared since the beginning of the
world. This matter has been described by the Count Marsigli, who
designates it sometimes under the name of _glu_, and sometimes as an
_unctuosity_. It is the "ooze" of marine surveyors, and consists chiefly
of carbonate of lime, ninety per cent. of which is formed of minute
animal organisms. Its mealy adhesiveness results from the pressure of
the superimposed water. The numerous salts which exist in the sea can
neither be deposited in its bed, nor exhaled with the vapour, to be
again poured upon the soil in showers of rain. Particular agents retain
these salts in solution, transform them, and prevent their accumulation.
Hence sea water always maintains a certain degree of saltness and
bitterness, and the ocean continues to present the chemical characters
which it has exhibited in all times, varying only in certain localities
where more or less fresh water is poured into the sea basin from rivers:
thus the saltness of the Mediterranean is greater than that of the
ocean, probably because it loses more water by evaporation than it
receives from its fresh-water affluents. For the opposite reason, the
Black and the Caspian Seas are less charged with these salts. The Dead
Sea is so strongly impregnated with salt that the body of a man floats
on its surface without sinking, like a piece of cork upon fresh water.
The supposed cause is excessive evaporation and the absence of rivers of
any importance.

The saltness of the sea seems to be generally less towards the poles
than the equator; but there are exceptions to this law. In the Irish
Channel, near the Cumberland coast, the water contains salt equal to the
fortieth of its weight; on the coast of France, it is equal to one
thirty-second; in the Baltic, it is equal to a thirtieth; at Teneriffe,
a twenty-eighth; and off the coast of Spain, to a sixteenth. Again, in
many places the sea is less salt at the surface than at the bottom. In
the Straits of the Dardanelles, at Constantinople, the proportion is as
seventy-two to sixty-two. In the Mediterranean, it is as thirty-two to
twenty-nine. It is also stated that as the salt increases at a certain
depth, the water becomes less bitter. At the mouth of the great rivers
it is scarcely necessary to add that the water is always less saline
than on shores which receive no supplies of fresh water; the same remark
applies to sea water in the vicinity of polar ice, the melting of which
is productive of much fresh water. A recent analysis of the water of the
Dead Sea by M. Roux gives about two pounds of salt to one gallon of
water. No mineral water, if we except that of the Salt Lake of Utah, is
so largely impregnated with saline substances; the quantity of bromide
of magnesia is 0·35 grammes to the litre. The water of the Dead Sea is,
according to these proportions, the richest natural depository of
bromide, which it might be made to furnish abundantly. The waters of the
great Lake of Utah and Lake Ourmiah in Persia are both highly saline. In
Lake Ourmiah, as in the Dead Sea, the proportion of salt is six times
greater than in the ocean. Many of our fresh-water lakes were probably
salt originally, but have by degrees lost their saline properties by the
mingling of their waters with those of the rivers which traverse or flow
into them. Among the lakes which appear to have been divested of their
saline properties may be mentioned the great lakes of Canada and the Sea
of Baikal, in all of which seals and other marine animals are still
found, which have become acclimatized as the water gradually became
fresh.

The saltness of sea water increases its density, and at the same time
its buoyancy, thus adapting it for bearing ships and other burdens on
its bosom; moreover, to abbreviate slightly Dr. Maury's remark, "the
brine of the ocean is the ley of the earth." From it the sea derives
dynamical power, and its currents their main strength. It is the salt of
the sea that imparts to its waters those curious anomalies in the laws
of freezing and of thermal dilatation, that assist the rays of heat to
penetrate its bosom; the salts of the sea invest it with adaptations
which fresh water could not possess. In the latter case, the maximum
density would be thirty-nine degrees two seconds F. instead of
twenty-seven degrees two seconds F., when the dynamical force of the sea
would be insufficient to put the Gulf Stream in motion. Nor could it
regulate those climates we call marine.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have said that sea water contains nearly all the soluble substances
which exist in the globe. Nevertheless its exhalation is comparatively
pure. "The water which evaporates from the sea," says Youman, in his
"Chemistry," "is nearly pure, containing but very minute traces of
salts. Falling as rain upon the land, it washes the soil, percolates
through the rocky layers, and becomes charged with saline substances,
which are borne seaward by the returning currents. The ocean, therefore,
is the great depository of all substances that water can dissolve and
carry down from the surface of the continents; and, as there is no
channel for their escape, they would constantly accumulate, were it not
for the creatures which inhabit the seas, and utilize the material thus
brought within their reach." These substances are chloride of sodium or
marine salt, sulphates of magnesia, potassa, lime, and other substances
which the water of various seas is found to contain.

In the year 1847, I made an analysis of water taken a few leagues from
the coast at Havre, which gave the following result, from one litre (1
pint·760773):--[2]

                                                         Grammes.
    Chloride of sodium                                    25·704
    Chloride of magnesium                                  2·905
    Sulphate of magnesia                                   2·462
    Sulphate of lime                                       1·210
    Sulphate of potassa                                    0·094
    Carbonate of lime                                      0·132
    Silicate of soda                                       0·017
    Bromide of sodium                                      0·103
    Bromide of magnesium                                   0·030
    Oxide of iron, carbonate and phosphate of magnesia,}   Only
      and oxide of manganese                           }   traces.
                                                          ------
                                                          32·657
                                                          ======

The water of the Mediterranean contains more salts than that of the
ocean.

The following are, according to M. Usiglio, who was one of a commission
sent to examine the different kinds of salt water in the south of
France, the component parts of one hundred gallons of Mediterranean
water:--

                                     lbs.
    Chloride of sodium            29·524
    Chloride of potassium          0·405
    Chloride of magnesium          3·219
    Sulphate of magnesia           2·477
    Chloride of calcium            6·080
    Sulphate of lime               1·557
    Carbonate of lime              0·114
    Bromide of sodium              0·356
    Protoxide of iron              0·003
                                  ------
                    Total         43·735
                                  ======

We conclude, from the quantity of sea salt contained in the water of the
ocean, that, if it were spread over the surface of the globe, it would
form a layer of more than thirty feet in height.

The salt contained in sea water gives it a greater density than fresh
water; its average specific weight is 1.027. The density of the water of
the Mediterranean is, according to M. Usiglio, 1.025 when at the
temperature of seventy degrees. But the saltness of the sea varies very
much under the influence of a great many local circumstances, among
which we must count principally currents, winds favourable to
evaporation, rivers coming from the continents, &c.

It has been remarked that the sea is less salt towards the poles than at
the equator; that the saltness increases, in general, with the distance
from land, and the depth of the water; that the interior seas, such as
the Baltic, the Black Sea, the White Sea, the Sea of Marmora, and the
Yellow Sea, are less salt than the ocean. The Mediterranean is an
exception to this last rule; it is, as we have seen, salter than the
ocean. This difference is explained by the fact that the quantity of
fresh water brought into it by rivers is less than that lost by
evaporation. The Mediterranean must therefore grow salter with time,
unless its water is discharged into the ocean by a counter current,
which would run under the current coming from the Atlantic by the
Straits of Gibraltar.

The Black Sea, on the contrary, the water of which has a density of only
1.013, receives from rivers more fresh water than it loses by
evaporation. The saltness of this interior sea is only half as intense
as that of the ocean.

The Sea of Azov and the Caspian Sea are still less salt than the Black
Sea.

The following table shows the relative composition of the water in these
three interior seas:--

  +--------------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
  |                          |  Black Sea.  | Sea of Azov. | Caspian Sea. |
  | In 100 Gallons of Water. |   Density    |   Density    |   Density    |
  |                          |    1·013     |    1·009.    |    1·005.    |
  +--------------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
  | Chloride of sodium       |   14·0195    |    9·6583    |    3·6731    |
  | Chloride of potassium    |    9·1892    |    0·1279    |    0·0761    |
  | Chloride of magnesium    |    1·3045    |    0·8870    |    0·6324    |
  | Sulphate of magnesia     |    1·4704    |    0·7642    |    1·2389    |
  | Sulphate of lime         |    0·1047    |    0·2879    |    0·4903    |
  | Bicarbonate of magnesia  |    0·2086    |    0·1286    |    0·0129    |
  | Bicarbonate of lime      |    0·3646    |    0·0221    |    0·1705    |
  | Bromide of magnesium     |    0·0052    |    0·0035    |    traces    |
  |                          +--------------+--------------+--------------+
  |                          |   17·6663    |   11·8795    |    6·2942    |
  +--------------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

In lakes without any outlet, as the Dead Sea and the Lake of Ural, the
degree of saltness is considerably augmented. Numerous experiments have
proved that the water of the Dead Sea is six times salter than that of
the ocean. MM. Boutron and O'Henry analysed, in April, 1850, after the
rainy season, some water of the Dead Sea, taken at about two leagues
from the mouth of the Jordan; its density was then 1·10.

The saltness of sea water makes it more fitted to float ships, because
its density is increased by the salts which are dissolved in it. Besides
this, these salts contribute to prevent the water becoming contaminated
with decomposed organic matter.

By the table representing the composition of the water of the ocean and
of that of the Mediterranean, we see that salts of lime and potassium,
as well as iodine and silica, are only found in infinitely small
quantities. Nevertheless, the lime and silica contained in the sea water
are of very great importance; for these quantities, which appear to us
so small in the table of a chemical analysis, become enormous in the
entire extent of the ocean. The marine plants take in the lime, the
silica, the potassa, and the iodides which are dissolved in the sea
water; these mineral substances enter into their textures. It is from
the carbonate of lime and silica that the marine animals form their
solid covering, their shell or carapace. The infusoria make use of the
lime, silica, and potassa for the same purpose. It is by the life and
habits of the polypi that we explain those _Coral Islands_ found in the
sea, the existence of which has been a subject of much astonishment,
and ought, therefore, to find a place in this chapter.

The Pacific and Indian Oceans are studded with islands in a state of
formation, which owe their origin to the polypi and corallines. These
zoophytes extract from the sea water the lime and silicium which are
found there in the state of soluble salts. In order to grow and develop,
they must be continually under water. They are constantly producing
calcareous deposits; these deposits rise rapidly, and at last reach the
surface of the water. Then the seaweed and rubbish of all kinds that the
sea carries along with it, arrested by these emerged masses, cover them
with a layer of fertile soil; which is soon covered with vegetation, as
the birds and the waves bring seeds thither.

The Coral Islands of the Pacific, which are described in another
chapter, are formed in this manner.

Besides the substances named, sea water also contains, in
infinitesimally small quantities, metals, such as iron, copper, lead and
silver. The old copper collecting round the keels of ships sometimes so
much silver that it has been thought worth extracting! A curious
calculation has been attempted, based on the age of ships and the
distance they have gone during all their voyages, to show that the sea
contains in solution two million tons of silver.[3]

The question has often been asked, whence comes the salt and other
substances held in solution in sea water? If our readers will turn back
to the first few pages of "The World before the Deluge," they will
better understand the very simple geological explanation that we are
going to give of the origin of different substances dissolved in sea
water.

In the first stage of our planet, before the watery vapours contained in
the primitive atmosphere were condensed, and before they had begun to
fall on the earth in the form of boiling rain, the shell of the earth
contained an infinite variety of heterogeneous mineral substances, some
soluble in water, others not. When rain fell on the burning surface for
the first time, the waters became charged with all the soluble
substances, which were reunited and afterwards deposited, accumulating
in the large depressions of the soil. The seas of the primitive globe
were thus formed of rain water, holding in solution all that the earth
had given up, collected in large basins. Chloride of sodium, sulphates
of soda, magnesia, potassium, lime, and silica, in the form of soluble
silicate; in a word, every soluble matter that the primitive globe
contained formed part of the mineral contingent of this water. If we
reflect that through all time up to the present day none of the general
laws of nature have changed--if we consider that the soluble substances
contained in the water of the primitive seas have remained there, and
that the fresh water of the rivers constantly replaces the water which
disappears by evaporation--we have the true explanation of the saltness
of sea water. "It is a very simple theory, it is true," adds M. Figuier,
"but one that we have found nowhere, and the responsibility of which we
therefore claim. The chloride of sodium is by no means the only
substance dissolved in sea water. It contains, besides, many other
mineral substances: in short, every _soluble salt_ on the face of the
globe, and, along with them, portions of different metals in infinitely
small quantities."

The mean temperature of the surface of the sea is nearly the same as the
atmosphere, so long as no currents of heat or cold interpose their
perturbing influence. In the neighbourhood of the Tropics, it appears
that the surface of the water is slightly warmer than the ambient air,
but experiments on the temperature of the sea from the surface to the
bottom reveal, according to our author,[4] "some evidence which
establishes a curious law. In very deep water a perfectly uniform
temperature of four degrees below zero prevails, which corresponds, as
physics have established, to the maximum density of water. Under the
Equator this temperature exists at the depth of seven thousand feet. In
the Polar regions, where water is colder at the surface, this
temperature is maintained at four thousand six hundred feet. The
isothermal lines of four degrees form a line of demarcation between the
Zones, where the surface of the sea is colder, and those where it is
warmer than the bed of four degrees below zero." This is more clearly
shown in Fig. 4, which represents a section of the ocean, the curved
line which touches two points at the surface indicating the depths where
the temperature is constantly fixed at four degrees.

Dr. Maury's account of this phenomenon is asserted with less confidence.
The existence of an _isothermal floor_ of the ocean, as he calls it,
was first suggested by the observations of Kotzebue, Admiral Beechey,
and Sir James C. Ross. "Its temperature, according to Kotzebue, is
thirty-six degrees Fahr., or four degrees Cent.; the depth of this bed,
of invariable and uniform temperature, is twelve hundred fathoms at the
Equator; thence it gradually rises to the parallel of about fifty-six
degrees north and south, when it crops out, and there the temperature of
the sea from top to bottom is conjectured to be permanent at thirty-six
degrees. The place of this outcrop, no doubt, shifts with the seasons,
vibrating north and south, after the manner of the Calm belts.
Proceeding onwards to the Frigid zones, this aqueous stratum of an
unchanging temperature dips again, and continues to incline till it
reaches the Poles, at the depth of seven hundred and fifty fathoms; so
that on the equatorial side of the outcrop the water above the
isothermal floor is the warmer, but in Polar seas the supernatant water
is the colder."

[Illustration: Fig 4. Thermal Lines of equal Temperature.]

       *       *       *       *       *

In the saline properties of sea water Maury discovers one of the
principal forces from which currents in the ocean proceed. "The brine of
the ocean is the ley of the earth," he says; "from it the sea derives
dynamical powers, and its currents their main strength. Hence, to
understand the dynamics of the ocean, it is necessary to study the
effects of their saltness upon the equilibrium of the waves. Why is the
sea made salt? It is the salts of the sea that impart to its waters
those curious anomalies in the laws of freezing and of thermal
dilatation. It is the salts of the sea that assist the rays of heat to
penetrate its bosom." The circulation of the ocean is indispensable to
the distribution of temperature--to the maintenance of the
meteorological and climatic conditions which rule the development of
life; and this circulation could not exist--at least, the character of
its waters would be completely changed--if they were fresh in place of
salt. "Let us imagine," says M. Julien, "that the sea, now entirely
composed of fresh water, of one uniform temperature from the Pole to the
Equator, and from the surface to its greatest depths; the solar heat
would penetrate the liquid beds nearest to the Equator; it would dilate
them, so as to raise them above their primitive level; by the single
effect of gravitation, they would glide on the surface towards the polar
zones. The absence of all solar radiation would tend, on the contrary,
to cool and contract them without this tendency. An exchange would be
established from the extremities towards the centre; in other words, a
counter current of cold and heavy water, calculated to replace the
losses occasioned by the action of solar radiation, would descend from
the Poles, but quite maintaining itself beneath the light and warm
current from the Equator."

In a like system of general circulation, the physical properties of pure
water, which attains its maximum of density seven degrees two seconds F.
below zero, would produce the most singular consequences. As its
temperature rose above that point, the water would become lighter,
having, consequently, a tendency to ascend towards the upper beds. After
this, the equatorial current, meeting in its progress towards the Poles
the cold water, would itself be cooled down; and when its temperature
had reached four degrees below zero, being now heavier than the polar
current, would change places with it, descending until it reached water
equally dense, while the polar current would ascend. Hence would arise a
sort of confusion of currents which would give to a fresh-water ocean
the strangest results, disarranging every instant the regular
circulation of its waters. It could not be so, however, in an ocean of
salt water, which attains its maximum specific gravity at four degrees
eight seconds F. below zero. By evaporation at the surface it is
concentrated and precipitated, and thus rendered denser than that
immediately below the surface. It consequently sinks, while the lower
beds come up to replace, in order to modify it, and in turn to be
precipitated in the same manner. "In this manner we find established a
continually ascending and descending movement, which carries down into
the depths of ocean the water warmed at the surface by the solar rays of
the Torrid zone. This double vertical current facilitates and prepares
the grand horizontal current which puts these submarine reservoirs of
heat in communication with the lower beds of the glacial sea. In the
Arctic basin the clouds, the melted snow, and the great rivers, which
have their mouths on the north of both continents, produce considerable
quantities of fresh water, which, mixing with the waves of the Polar
Sea, form a bed of mean density light enough to maintain itself and flow
off towards the Atlantic Ocean. These surface movements determine in the
lower regions certain contrary movements, whence originate the powerful
counter currents which ascend the Straits from Baffin's Bay and reappear
in the mysterious 'Polynia' of Kane, diffusing there its treasure of
heat brought from intertropical seas." Dr. Kane, in his interesting
Narrative, reports an open sea north of the parallel of eighty-two
degrees, which he and his party crossed a barrier of ice eighty miles
broad to reach, and before he reached it the thermometer marked sixty
degrees. Beyond this ice-bound region he found himself on the shores of
an iceless sea, extending in an unbroken sheet of water as far as the
eye could reach towards the Pole. Its waves were dashing on the beach
with the swell of a great ocean; the tides ebbed and flowed. Now the
question arises, Where did those tides have their origin? The tidal wave
of the Atlantic could not have passed under the icy barrier which De
Haven found so firm; therefore they must have been cradled in the cold
sea round the Pole; in which case it follows that most, if not all, the
unexplored regions about the Pole must be covered with deep water, the
only source of strong and regular tides. Seals were sporting and
waterfowl feeding in this open sea, as Dr. Kane tells us, and the
temperature of the water which rolled in and dashed at his feet with
measured beat was thirty-six degrees, while the bottom of the icy
barrier of eighty miles was probably hundreds of feet below the surface
level.

"The existence of these tides," says Maury, "with the immense flow and
drift which annually take place from the Polar Seas and the Atlantic,
suggests many conjectures as to the condition of these unexplored
regions. Whalemen have always been puzzled as to the breeding place of
the great whale. It is a cold-water animal, and, following up the train
of thought, the question arises, Is not the nursery for the great whale
in this Polar Sea, which is so set about and hemmed in by a hedge of
ice, that man may not trespass there?"

One or two points worthy of notice may be recorded here. Shallow water,
and water near the coast, or covering raised sand-banks, is colder than
water in the open sea. Alexander von Humboldt explains this phenomenon
by supposing that deep waters of higher temperature reascend from the
lowest depths and mingle with the upper beds. Fogs are frequently formed
over sand-banks, because the cold water which covers them produces a
local precipitation of atmospheric vapour. The contour of these fogs are
perfectly defined when seen from a distance: they reproduce the form and
accidents due to the submarine soil. Moreover, we often see clouds
arrested over these points, which look from afar like the peaks of
mountains.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: "World before the Deluge." Second edition.]

[Footnote 2: Examen Comparatif des Principales eaux Minérales Salines de
France et d'Allemagne, par MM. L. Figuier et Mialhe. Read at the
Académie de Médecin, 23rd of May, 1848.]

[Footnote 3: Sir J. Herschel's "Physical Geography," p. 22, gives the
basis and details of this calculation.]

[Footnote 4: "La Terre et les Mers," p. 517. Troisième Ed.]




CHAPTER II.

CURRENTS OF THE OCEAN.

    "            ... seas that sweep
    The three-decker's oaken mast."

    TENNYSON.


The ocean is a scene of unceasing agitation; "its vast surface rises and
falls," to use the image suggested by Schleiden, "as if it were gifted
with a gentle power of respiration; its movements, gentle or powerful,
slow or rapid, are all determined by differences of temperature."

Heat increases its volume and changes the specific gravity of the water,
which is dilated or condensed in proportion to the change of
temperature. In proportion as it cools, water increases in density, and
descends into the depths until it reaches a constant temperature of four
degrees twenty-five minutes Cent. below zero, which it preserves in all
latitudes at the depth of a thousand yards, according to M. D'Urville.

If the water continues to cool, and reaches zero, it becomes lighter
than it was at four degrees twenty-five minutes Cent., and ascends in a
state of congelation--a process which, by an admirable provision of
nature, can only take place at the surface. So long as the temperature
is above four degrees twenty-five minutes, water is light, and ascends
to the surface, while colder water sinks to the bottom. Below four
degrees twenty-five minutes the process is reversed; the first
phenomenon is always in force under the Equator, the second near the
Poles. The evaporation, which is in continual operation in warm seas,
forming vast rain-clouds at the expense of the sea, is compensated by
unceasing currents of colder water flowing from the Poles. This
evaporation has a direct influence, moreover, on the density of sea
water, and is pointed out by Dr. Maury as a remarkable instance of the
compensations by which the oceanic waters are governed: "According to
Rodgers' observations," he says, "the average specific gravity of sea
water on the parallels of thirty-four degrees north and south, at a mean
temperature of sixty-four degrees, is just what it ought to be,
according to saline and thermal laws; but its specific gravity, when
taken from the Equator at a mean temperature of eighty-one degrees, is
much greater than, according to the same laws, it ought to be--the
observed difference being ·0015, whereas it ought to be ·0025. Let us
inquire," he adds, "what makes the equatorial waters so much heavier
than they ought to be.

"The anomaly occurs in the trade-wind region, and is best developed
between the parallel of forty degrees in the North Atlantic and the
Equator, where the water grows warmer, but not proportionally lighter.
The water sucked up by the trade-winds is fresh water, and the salt it
contained, being left behind, is just sufficient to counteract by its
weight the effect of thermal dilatation upon the specific gravity of
water between the parallels of thirty-four degrees north and south. The
thirsting of the trade-winds for vapour is so balanced as to produce
perfect compensation, and a more beautiful instance than we have here
stumbled upon is not, it appears to me, to be found in the mechanism of
the universe."

The oceanic currents are due to a great number of causes: the duration
and force of the winds, for instance; the rise and fall of tides all
over the globe; the variations in the density of the waters, according
to its temperature, and the evaporating powers of the atmosphere; the
depth and degree of saltness to which we have already alluded; finally,
to the variations of barometric pressure.

The currents which furrow the ocean present a striking contrast with the
immobility of the neighbouring waters; they form rivers of a determinate
breadth, whose banks are formed by the water in repose, and whose course
is often made quite perceptible by the vrachs and other aquatic plants
which follow in their train.

In order to comprehend the origin of these _pelagic rivers_, it is
necessary to consider the laws which govern the atmospheric currents, in
particular the _trade-winds_. "Hence," says Maury, "in studying the
system of oceanic circulation, we set out with the very simple
assumption, that from whatever part of the ocean a current is found to
run, to that same part a current of equal volume is bound to return;
for on this principle is based the whole system of currents and counter
currents." The differences of temperature between equinoctial and polar
countries generate two opposing currents, the upper one proceeding from
the Equator to the Poles, the lower one directed from the Poles towards
the Equator. On reaching the Equator, the cold current of air from the
Poles is warmed and rarefied, and ascends to the upper beds of the
atmosphere, whence it is again led to its point of departure; there it
is again cooled, and returns with the lower current towards the tropical
regions. But the rotatory movement of the earth modifies the direction
of these atmospheric currents. The movement by which it is carried from
west to east being almost nothing at the Poles, but inconceivably rapid
under the Equator, it follows that the cold air, in proportion as it
advances towards the Tropics, ought to incline a little towards the
west. This is just what takes place with these counter currents. The
_north-east trade-winds_, which prevail in the northern hemisphere, move
in a sort of spiral curve, turning to the west as they rush from the
Poles to the Equator, and in the opposite direction as they move from
the Equator towards the Poles; the immediate cause of this motion being
the rotation of the earth on its axis. "The earth," says Dr. Maury,
"moves from west to east. Now, if we imagine a particle of atmosphere at
the North Pole, where it is _at rest_, to be put in motion in a straight
line towards the Equator, we can easily see how this particle of air,
coming from the very axis of diurnal rotation, where it did not partake
of the diurnal motion, would, in consequence of its own _vis inertiæ_,
find as it travelled south that the earth was slipping from under it, as
it were, and it would appear to be coming from the north-east and going
towards the south-west; in other words, it would be a north-east wind."

In the same manner, the upper currents of air, which proceed towards the
Poles with equatorial rapidity, ought to outstrip the atmospheric beds,
which are gifted with much smaller rapidity of motion towards the Poles,
and turn them towards the east in consequence. These are the south-west
and north-west counter trade-winds, which, passing above the _north_ and
_south-east trades_, often sweep the surface of the sea in the latitudes
of the Temperate zone. The two _trades_ are separated by a belt more or
less broad, where the friction experienced at the surface of the sea
neutralizes their impulse towards the west; in general, the current of
air there is an ascending current. This belt, which does not exactly
correspond with the Equator, is called the _Zone of Calms_, where
atmospheric tempests frequently occur, and the winds make the entire
tour of the compass, which has acquired for them the name of
_tornadoes_.

The trade-winds, whose movement towards the west is retarded by the
friction which the waves of the ocean oppose to them, communicate to
these waves, by a sort of reaction, a tendency towards the west, or, to
speak more exactly, towards the south-west in the northern hemisphere,
and towards the north-west in the opposite hemisphere. The currents on
the surface of the water which result from this reaction, reunite under
the Equator, and form the _grand equinoctial_ current which impels the
waters of the east towards the west. This movement is stronger at the
edges than in the middle of the current, because the force which
produces it acts there with more energy: it results from this, that the
currents bifurcate more readily when any obstacle presents itself to its
movement. In the Atlantic Ocean, bifurcation takes place a little to the
south of the Equator; the southern branch descends along the coast of
Brazil, and probably returns by reascending along the west coast of
Africa. The northern branch follows the coast of Brazil and Guiana,
enters the Sea of the Antilles, and directs its course, reinforced by
the current which reaches it from the north-east, into the Bay of
Honduras, traverses the Yucatan Channel, and enters the Gulf of Mexico,
whence it debouches by the Florida Channel, under the name of the _Gulf
Stream_. Of this oceanic marvel Dr. Maury observes that "there is a
river in the bosom of the ocean; in the several droughts it never fails,
and in the mightiest floods it never overflows; its banks and its bottom
are of cold water, while its current is of warm; it takes its rise in
the Gulf of Mexico, and empties itself into the Arctic Seas. This mighty
river is the Gulf Stream. In no other part of the world is there such a
majestic flow of water; its current is more rapid than the Amazon, more
impetuous than the Mississippi, and its volume is more than a thousand
times greater. Its waters, as far as the Carolina coast, are of indigo
blue; they are so distinctly indicated that their line of junction can
be marked by the eye." Such is Dr. Maury's description of this powerful
current of warm water, which traverses the Atlantic Ocean, and
influences in no slight manner the climate of Northern Europe, and
especially our own shores.

The Gulf Stream thus described by the American _savant_ issues from the
Florida Channel, with a breadth of thirty-four miles, and a depth of two
thousand two hundred feet, moving at the rate of four and a half miles
per hour. The temperature of the water in the vicinity is about thirty
degrees Cent. From the American coast the current takes a north-east
direction towards Spitzbergen, its velocity and volume diminishing as it
expands in breadth. Towards the forty-third degree of latitude it forms
two branches, one of which strikes the coast of Ireland and of Norway,
whither it frequently transports seeds of tropical origin: it also warms
the frozen waters of the glacial sea. The other branch, inclining
towards the south, not far from the Azores, visits the coast of Africa,
whence it returns to the Antilles. Throughout this vast circuit may be
seen all sorts of plants and driftwood, with waifs and strays of every
description borne on the bosom of the ocean. "Midway the Atlantic, in
the triangular space between the Azores, Canaries, and Cape de Verd
Islands, is the great Sargasso Sea, covering an area equal in extent to
the Mississippi Valley: it is so thickly matted over with the Gulf Weed
(_Sargassum bacciferum_), that the speed of vessels passing through it
is actually retarded, and to the companions of Columbus it seemed to
mark the limits of navigation; they became alarmed. To the eye at a
little distance it seemed sufficiently substantial to walk upon." These
moving vegetable masses, always green, which tail off to a steady
breeze, serving as an anemometer to the mariner, afford an asylum to
multitudes of mollusks and crustaceans.

The Gulf Stream plays a grand part in the Atlantic system. It carries
the tepid water of the equinoctial regions into the high latitudes;
beyond the fortieth parallel the temperature is sixteen degrees Cent.
Urged by the south-west winds which predominate in that zone, its tepid
waters mix with those of the Northern Sea, softening the rigour of the
climate in these regions. To the south of the great bank of
Newfoundland, the warm current, in vast volume rushing from the Florida
Straits, meets the cold currents descending from the Arctic Circle
through Baffin's Bay and the Sea of Greenland, running with equal
velocity towards the south. A portion of these waters reascend towards
the Pole along the western coast of Greenland. It is to this conflict of
the polar and equatorial waters, that the formation of the banks of
Newfoundland is ascribed. Each of these great currents having
unceasingly deposited the débris carried in its bosom, the bank has been
thus formed bit by bit in the concourse of ages.

The difference of temperature between the Gulf Stream and the waters it
traverses gives birth inevitably to tempests and _cyclones_. In 1780 a
terrible storm ravaged the Antilles, in which twenty thousand persons
perished. The ocean quitted its bed and inundated whole cities; the
trunks of trees, mingled with other débris, were tossed into the air.
Numerous catastrophes of this kind have earned for the Gulf Stream the
title of the King of the Tempests. In consequence of the numerous
nautical documents which have been placed at the command of the National
Observatory of Washington, and the admirable use made of them by the
late Naval Secretary and his assistants, the directions and range of
these cyclones engendered by the Gulf Stream may be foreseen, and their
most dangerous ravages turned aside. As an example of the utility of Dr.
Maury's labours in settling the direction of storms in the traject of
the Gulf Stream, we quote a well-known instance: In the month of
December, 1859, the American packet _San Francisco_ was employed as a
transport to convey a regiment to California. It was overtaken by one of
these sudden storms, which placed the ship and its freight in a most
dangerous position. A single wave, which swept the deck, tore out the
masts, stopped the engines, and washed overboard a hundred and
twenty-nine persons, officers and soldiers. From that moment the
unfortunate steamer floated upon the waters, a waif abandoned to the
fury of the wind. The day after the disaster the _San Francisco_ was
seen in this desperate situation by a ship which reached New York,
although unable to assist her. Another ship met her some days after,
but, like the other, could render no assistance. When the report reached
New York, two steamers were despatched to her assistance; but in what
direction were they to go? what part of the ocean were they to explore?
The luminaries of Washington Observatory were appealed to! Having
consulted his charts as to the direction and limits of the Gulf Stream
at that period of the year, Dr. Maury traced on a chart the spot to
which the disabled steamer was likely to be driven by the current, and
the course to be taken by the vessels sent to her assistance. The crew
and passengers of the _San Francisco_ were saved before their arrival.
Three ships, which had seen their distressing situation, had been able
to reach them, and the steamers sent to their assistance only arrived
to witness the safety of the passengers and crew. But the point where
the steamer foundered shortly after they were transferred to the
rescuing ships was precisely that indicated by Dr. Maury. If the ships
sent to their assistance had reached in time, the triumph of SCIENCE
would have been complete.

The equinoctial currents of the Pacific are very imperfectly known. It
is believed, however, that they traverse the Great Ocean in its whole
length, and bifurcate opposite the Asiatic coast, where the weakest
branch bends northward until it encounters the polar current from
Behring's Straits, when it returns along the Mexican coast. The larger
branch inclines towards the south, passing round Australia, where it is
met by one or many counter currents coming from the Indian Ocean--of the
complicated and dangerous nature of which both Cook and La Peyrouse
speak.

The cold waters from the Antarctic Pole are carried towards the Equator
by three great oceanic rivers. The first bifurcates in forty-five
degrees; one portion goes round Cape Horn; the other--Humboldt's
current--ascends the Chilian and Peruvian coasts up to the Equator,
ameliorating the rainless climate as it goes, and making it delightful.
A second great current takes the direction of the African coast, and is
divided at the Cape, ascending both the east and west coasts of Africa.
On either side of the warm current which escapes from the intertropical
parts of the Indian Ocean, but especially along the Australian coast, a
polar current wends its way from the Antarctic regions, carrying
supplies of cold water to modify the climate and restore the equilibrium
in that part of the world. This cold current turns at first towards the
west, then towards the south in the direction of Madagascar; more to the
south still it is driven back by the polar current from Cape Horn. It is
thus that the warm waters from the Bay of Bengal, pressed by the Indian
polar current, circulate between Africa and Australia, one lateral
branch of the current sweeping along the south coast of this vast
continent.

       *       *       *       *       *

The monsoons which reign in the Indian Ocean tend still more to
complicate the currents, already sufficiently intricate and confused.
But it is not intended at present to occupy the reader's attention
further with these questions of intricate currents.

We have already spoken of a submarine current which appears to carry
the waters of the Mediterranean into the Atlantic Ocean. Its existence
is in some respects established by calculations which prove that the
quantity of salt water supplied by the upper current through the Straits
of Gibraltar is equal to seventy-two cubic miles per annum, while the
quantity of fresh water brought down by the rivers is equal to six, and
the quantity lost by evaporation to twelve cubic miles per annum. This
would leave an annual excess of sixty-six cubic miles, if the
equilibrium was not re-established by an under current flowing into the
Atlantic. This hypothesis would appear to have been confirmed by a very
curious fact.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, a Dutch brig, pursued by the
French corsair _Phoenix_, was overhauled between Tangier and Tarifa, and
seemed to be sunk by a single broadside; but, in place of foundering and
going down, the brig, being freighted with a cargo of oil and alcohol,
floated between the two currents, and, drifting towards the west,
finally ran aground, after two or three days, in the neighbourhood of
Tangier, more than twelve miles from the spot where she had disappeared
under the waves. She had therefore traversed that distance, drawn by the
action of the under current in a direction opposite to that of the
surface current. This ascertained fact, added to some recent
experiments, lend their support to the opinion which admits of the
existence of an outward current through the Straits of Gibraltar. Dr.
Maury quotes an extract from the "log" of Lieutenant Temple, of the
United States Navy, bearing the same inference. At noon on the 8th of
March, 1855, the ship _Levant_ stood into Almeria Bay, where many ships
were waiting for a chance to get westwards. Here he was told that at
least a thousand sail were waiting between the bay and Gibraltar, "some
of them having got as far as Malaga only to be swept back again.
Indeed," he adds, "no vessel had been able to get out into the Atlantic
for three months past." Supposing this current to run no faster than two
knots an hour, and assuming its depth to be four hundred feet only, and
its width seven miles, and that it contained the average proportion of
solid matter, estimated at one-thirtieth, it appears that salt enough to
make eighty-eight cubic miles of solid matter were carried into the
Mediterranean in those ninety days. "Now," continues Dr. Maury, "unless
there were some escape for all this solid matter which has been running
into the sea, not for ninety days, but for ages, it is very clear that
the Mediterranean would long ere this have been a vat of strong brine,
or a bed of cubic crystals."

For the same reason, Dr. Maury considers it certain that there is an
under current to the south of Cape Horn, which carries into the Pacific
Ocean the overflowings of the Atlantic. In fact, the Atlantic is fed
unceasingly by the Great American rivers, while the Pacific receives no
important affluent, but ought to be, and is, subjected to enormous
losses, in consequence of the evaporation continually taking place at
the surface.


TIDES.

Tides are periodical movements produced by the attraction of the sun and
moon. This action, which influences the whole mass of the earth, is made
manifest by the swelling movement of the waters. The attractive force
exercised by the moon is three times that of the sun, in consequence of
its approximation to the earth, as compared to the greater luminary.

In order to comprehend the theory of tides, we shall first consider the
_lunar_ influences, putting aside for a moment the _solar_ action.

[Illustration: Fig. 5. Lunar Tides.]

The attraction which the moon exercises upon any point on the earth's
surface is in the inverse ratio of the square of its distance. If we
draw a straight line from the moon passing through the centre of the
earth, this line will meet the surface of the waters at two points
diametrically opposite to each other--namely, Z and N (Fig. 5); one of
these points would be to the moon its _zenith_, the other its _nadir_.
The point of the sea which has the moon in the zenith--namely, that
above which the moon is perfectly perpendicular--will be nearest to the
planet, and will consequently be more strongly attractive to the centre
of the earth, while the points diametrically opposite to which the moon
is the _nadir_ will be more distant, and consequently less strongly
attracted by that luminary. It follows that the waters situated directly
under the moon will be attracted towards it, and form an accumulation or
swelling at that point; the waters at the antipodes being less strongly
attracted to the moon than to the centre of the earth, will form also a
secondary swelling on the surface of the sea, thus forming a double
tide, accumulating at the point nearest the moon and at its antipodes.
At the intermediate points of the circumference of the globe, where the
waters are not subjected to the direct attraction of the moon, the sea
is at low water, as represented in Fig. 5.

The earth, in its movement of rotation, presents, in the course of
twenty-four hours, every meridian on its surface to the lunar
attraction; consequently, each point in its turn, and at intervals of
six hours, is either under the moon, or ninety degrees removed from it:
it follows, that in the space of a lunar day--that is to say, in the
time which passes between two successive passages of the moon on the
same meridian--the oceanic waters will be at high and low tide twice in
the month on every point of the surface of the globe. But this result of
attraction is not exercised instantaneously. The moon has passed from
the meridian of the spot before the waters have attained their greatest
height; the flux reaches its maximum about three hours after the moon
has culminated; and the watery mountain follows the moon all round the
globe, from east to west, about three hours in its rear.

It is obvious, however, that the great inequalities of the bottom of the
sea; the existence of continents; the slopes of the coast, more or less
steep; the different breadths of channels and straits; finally, the
winds, the pelagic currents, and a crowd of local circumstances,--must
materially modify the course of the tides. Nor is the moon the only
celestial body which influences the rise and fall of the waters of the
sea. We have already said that the sun asserts an influence on the
waves. It is true that, in consequence of its great distance, this only
amounts to a thirty-eight-hundredth part of that of the earth's
satellite. The inequality which exists between the solar and lunar
days--the latter exceeding the first by fifty-four minutes--has also the
effect of adding to or subtracting from this force alternately. When the
sun and moon are in _conjunction_ (Fig. 6), or in opposition, that is to
say, placed upon the same right line, their attraction on the sea is
combined, and a _spring_ tide is produced. This happens at the period of
the _syzygies_--the period of new and full moon. At the period of the
_quadrature_, or the first and last quarters, the solar action, being
opposed to that of lunar attraction, tends to produce a sensibly weaker
tide.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. Lunar-Solar Tides.]

These effects are never produced instantaneously; but, the impulse once
given, it will continue to influence the tides for two or three days,
the highest and lowest tides being nearly in the proportion of 138 to
63, or of 7 to 3. The highest tides occur at the _equinoxes_, when the
moon is in perigee; the lowest at the _solstices_, when it is in apogee.
In our ports, and along the coast, the water rises twice in twenty-four
hours, when it is said to be high water; when it retires, it is low
water: they are respectively the _flux_ and _reflux_ of the waves.

The tide is retarded every day about fifty minutes, the lunar day being
twenty-four hours fifty minutes of mean time. If, for instance, it is
high water to-day at two o'clock in the morning, that of the next day
will take place at fifty minutes past two. Low water does not occur,
however, at the half of the intermediate time; the flux is more rapid
than the reflux: thus at Havre, Boulogne, and at corresponding places on
this side of the Channel, it takes two hours and eight minutes more in
retiring; at Brest, the difference is only sixteen minutes more than the
flux. The daily retardation of high water by the passage of the moon in
the meridian, at the equinoxes, is a constant quantity for the same
locality, which can be determined by direct observation.

The height of the tide varies in the different regions of the globe,
according to local circumstances. The eastern coast of Asia and the
western coast of Europe are exposed to extremely high tides; while in
the South Sea Islands, where they are very regular, they scarcely reach
the height of twenty inches. On the western coast of South America, the
tides rarely reach three yards; on the western coast of India they reach
the height of six or seven; and in the Gulf of Cambay it ranges from
five to six fathoms. This great difference makes itself felt in our own
and adjoining countries: thus, the tide, which at Cherbourg is seven and
eight yards high, attains the height of fourteen yards at Saint Malo,
while it reaches the height of ten yards at Swansea, at the mouth of the
Bristol Channel, increasing to double that height at Chepstow, higher up
the river. In general, the tide is higher at the bottom of a gulf than
at its mouth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The highest tide which is known occurs in the Bay of Fundy, which opens
up to the south of the isthmus uniting Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.
There the tide reaches forty, fifty, and even sixty feet, while it only
attains the height of seven or eight in the bay to the north of the same
isthmus. It is related that a ship was cast ashore upon a rock during
the night, so high, that at daybreak the crew found themselves and their
ship suspended in mid-air far above the water!

In the Mediterranean, which only communicates with the ocean by a narrow
channel, the phenomenon of tides is scarcely felt, and from this
cause--that the moon acts at the same time upon its whole surface, which
are not sufficiently abundant to increase the swelling mass of waters
formed by the moon's attraction; consequently, the swelling remains
scarcely perceptible. This is the reason why neither the Black Sea or
White Sea presents a tide, and the Mediterranean a very inconsiderable
one. Nevertheless, at Alexandria the tide rises twenty inches, and at
Venice this height is increased to about six feet and a half. Lake
Michigan is slightly affected by the lunar attraction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Whewell has prepared maps, in which the course of the tidal
wave is traced in every country of the globe. We see here that it
traverses the Atlantic, from the fiftieth degree of south latitude up to
the fiftieth parallel north, at the rate of five hundred and sixty miles
an hour. But the rapidity with which it proceeds is least in shallow
water. In the North Sea it travels at the rate of a hundred and eighty
miles. The tidal wave which proceeds round the coast of Scotland
traverses the German Ocean and meets in St. George's Channel, between
England and Ireland, where the conflict between the two opposing waves
presents some very complicated phenomena.

The winds, again, exercise a great influence on the height of the tides.
When the impulse of the wind is added to that of the attracting planet,
the normal height of the wave is considerably increased. If the wind is
contrary, the flux of the tide is almost annihilated. This happens in
the Gulf of Vera Cruz, where the tide is only perceptible once in three
days, when the wind blows with violence. An analogous phenomenon is
observable on the coast of Tasmania.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. Point du Raz, Coast of Brittany.]

The rising tide sometimes strikes the shore with a continuous and
incredible force. This violent shock is called the _surf_. The swell
then forms a billow, which expands to half a mile. The surf increases as
it approaches the coast, when it sometimes attains the height of six or
seven yards, forming an overhanging mountain of water, which gradually
sinks as it rolls over itself. But this motion is not in reality
progressive--it transports no floating body. The surf is very strong at
the Isle of Fogo, one of the Cape de Verd Islands in the Indian Ocean,
and at Sumatra, where the surf renders it dangerous and sometimes
impossible to land on the coast. Fig. 7 represents the effects of the
surf at Point du Raz, on the coast of Brittany. The winds adding their
influence to these causes, give birth on the surface of the sea to waves
or billows, which increase rapidly, rising in foaming mountains,
rolling, bounding, and breaking one against the other. "In one moment,"
says Malte Brun, "the waves seem to carry sea-goddesses on its breast,
which seem to revel amid plays and dances; in the next instant, a
tempest rising out of them, seems to be animated by its fury. They seem
to swell with passion, and we think we see in them marine monsters which
are prepared for war. A strong, constant, and equal wind produces long
swelling billows, which, rising on the same line, advance with a uniform
movement, one after the other, precipitating themselves upon the coast.
Sometimes these billows are suspended by the wind or arrested by some
current, thus forming, as it were, a liquid wall. In this position,
unhappy is the daring navigator who is subjected to its fury." The
highest waves are those which prevail in the offing off the Cape of Good
Hope at the period of high tide, under the influence of a strong
north-west wind, which has traversed the South Atlantic, pressing its
waters towards the Cape. "The billows there lift themselves up in long
ridges," says Dr. Maury, "with deep hollows between them. They run high
and fast, tossing their white caps aloft in the air, looking like the
green hills of a rolling prairie capped with snow, and chasing each
other in sport. Still, their march is stately, and their roll majestic.
The scenery among them is grand. Many an Australian-bound trader, after
doubling the Cape, finds herself followed for weeks at a time by these
magnificent rolling swells, furiously driven and lashed by the "brave
west winds." These billows are said to attain the height of thirty, and
even forty feet; but no very exact measurement of the height of waves is
recorded. One of these mountain waves placed between two ships conceals
each of them from the other--an effect which is partially represented in
Fig. 8. In rounding Cape Horn, waves are encountered from twenty to
thirty feet high; but in the Channel they rarely exceed the height of
nine or ten feet, except when they come in contact with some powerful
resisting obstacle. Thus, when billows are dashed violently against the
Eddystone Lighthouse, the spray goes right over the building, which
stands a hundred and thirty feet above the sea, and falls in torrents on
the roof. After the storm of Barbadoes in 1780, some old guns were
found on the shore, which had been thrown up from the bottom of the sea
by the force of the tempests.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Height of Waves off the Cape of Good Hope.]

If the waves, in their reflux, meet with obstacles, whirlpools and
whirlwinds are the result--the former the terror of navigators. Such are
the whirlpools known in the Straits of Messina, between the rocks of
Charybdis and Scylla, celebrated as the terror of ancient mariners, and
which were sung by Homer, Ovid, and Virgil:--

    "Scylla latus dextrum, lævum irrequieta Charybdis,
    Infestat; vorat hæc raptis revomitque carinas.
    ... Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim."

These rocks are better understood, and less redoubted in our days. At
Charybdis, there is a foaming whirlpool; at Scylla, the waves dash
against the low wall of rock which forms the promontory, scarcely
noticed by the navigator of our days.

Another celebrated whirlpool is that of Euripus, near the Island of
Euboea; another is known in the Gulf of Bothnia. But perhaps the best
known rocky danger is the Maelström, whose waters have a gyratory
movement, producing a whirlpool at certain states of the tide, the
result of opposing currents, which change every six hours, and which,
from its power and magnitude, is capable of attracting and engulfing
ships to their destruction, although chiefly dangerous to smaller craft.

To the combined effects of tides and whirlpools may also be attributed
the hurricanes, so dreaded by navigators, which so frequently visit the
Mauritius and other parts of the Indian Ocean. In periods of the utmost
calms, when there is scarcely a breath to ruffle the air, these shores
are sometimes visited by immense waves, accompanied by whirlwinds, which
seem capable of blowing the ships out of the water, seizing them by the
keel, whirling them round on an axis, and finally capsizing them. "At
the period of the changing monsoon, the winds, breaking loose from their
controlling forces, seem to rage with a fury capable of breaking up the
very fountains of the deep."

The hurricanes of the Atlantic occur in the months of August and
September, while the south-west monsoon of Africa and the southeast
monsoon of the West Indies are at their height; the agents of the one
drawing the north-east trade-winds into the interior of Mexico and
Texas, the other drawing them into the interior of Africa, greatly
disturbing the equilibrium of the atmosphere.


THE POLAR SEAS.

The extreme columns of the known world are Mount Parry, situated at
eight degrees from the North Pole, and Mount Ross, twelve degrees from
the South Pole. Beyond these limits our maps are mute; a blank space
marks each extremity of the terrestrial axis. Will man ever succeed in
passing these icy barriers? Will he ever justify the prediction of the
poet Seneca, who tells us that "the time will come in the distant future
when Ocean will relax her hold on the world, when the immense earth will
be open, when Tethys will appear amid new orbs, and where Thule
(Iceland) shall no longer be the extreme limit of the earth?"

          "Venient annis
    Sæcula seris quibus oceanus
    Vincula rerum laxet et ingens
    Pateat tellus, Tethysque novos
    Detegat orbes, nec sit terris
    Ultime Thule."

    _Medea._

No one can say. Every step we have taken in order to approach the Pole
has been dearly purchased; and it is not without reason that navigators
have named the south point of Greenland, Cape Farewell. Of the number of
expeditions, for the most part English, which have been fitted out, at
the cost of nearly a million sterling, to explore the Frozen Ocean,
one-twentieth have had for their mission to ascertain the fate of the
lamented Sir John Franklin.

The first navigator who penetrated to Arctic polar regions was Sebastian
Cabot, who in 1498 sought a north-west passage from Europe to China and
the Indies. Considering the date, and the state of navigation at that
period, this was perhaps the boldest attempt on record. Scandinavian
traditions attribute similar undertakings to the son of the King Rodian,
who lived in the seventh century; to Osher, the Norwegian, in 873; and
to the Princes Harold and Magnus, in 1150.

Sebastian Cabot reached as high as Hudson's Bay, but a mutiny of his
sailors forced him to retrace his steps. In 1500, Gaspard de Cortereal
discovered Labrador; in 1553, Sir Hugh Willoughby Nova Zembla; and
Chancellor the White Sea, about the same time. Davis visited in 1585 the
west coast of Greenland, and two years later he discovered the strait
which bears his name. In 1596 Barentz discovered Spitzbergen, which was
again seen by Hendrich Hudson, who sailed up to and beyond the
eighty-second parallel. Three years later Hudson gave his name to the
great Labrador Bay, but he could get no farther. His crew also revolted,
and he was left in the ship's launch with his son, seven sailors, and
the carpenter, who remained faithful. Thus perished one of our greatest
navigators.

The Island of Jan Mayen was discovered in 1611; the channel which Baffin
took for a bay, and which bears his name, was discovered in 1616.
Behring discovered, in his first voyage in 1727, the strait which
separates Siberia from America; he sailed through it in 1741, but his
ship was stranded, and he himself died of scorbutic disease.

In the year 1771 the Polar Sea was discovered by Hearne, a fur merchant;
it was explored long after by Mackenzie.

From the year 1810, when Sir John Ross, Franklin, and Parry turned their
attention to the Arctic regions, these expeditions to the Polar Seas
rapidly succeeded each other. In 1827 Parry reached the eighty-second
degree of north latitude; and in 1845 Sir John Franklin, with the ships
_Erebus_ and _Terror_, and their crews, departed on their last voyage,
from which neither he nor his companions ever returned. There is now no
doubt that they perished miserably, after having discovered the
north-west passage, which Captain M'Clure also discovered, coming from
the opposite direction, in 1850. In 1855 the expedition of Dr. Elisha
Kane found the sea open from the Pole.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Antarctic Pole had in the meantime attracted the attention of
navigators. In 1772 the Dutch captain, Kerguelen, discovered an island
which he took for a continent. In 1774 Captain Cook explored these
regions up to the seventy-first degree of latitude. James Weddell, in a
small whaler, sailed past this parallel in 1823. Biscoe discovered
Enderby's Land in 1831. The _Zelée_ and _Astrolabe_, under the command
of Captain Dumont D'Urville, of the French Marine, and the American
expedition, under Captain Wilkes, reached the same region in 1838. The
former discovered Adelia's Land. Finally, in 1841, Sir James Clark Ross,
nephew of Sir John Ross, with the _Erebus_ and _Terror_, penetrated up
to the seventy-eighth degree south latitude. Here he discovered the
volcanic islands which he named after his ships, and, farther to the
south, a new continent or land, which he called Victoria's Land.

While these efforts were being made to penetrate the ice which surrounds
the Antarctic Pole, a region having little which could attract human
enterprise, the interests of commerce seemed to call for obstinate and
persevering attempts to penetrate to the Arctic Pole. In spite of these
numerous expeditions, however, which extend over two centuries, the
regions round the North Pole are far from being known to geographers.
The fogs and snows which almost always cover them were the source of
many errors made by the earlier navigators. In his first voyage, made in
1818, Sir John Ross was led to think that Lancaster Sound was closed by
a chain of mountains, which he called the Croker Mountains; but in the
following year Captain Parry, in command of two ships, the _Hecla_ and
_Griper_, discovered that this was an error. This celebrated navigator
discovered Barrow's Straits, Wellington Channel, and Prince Regent
Inlet; Cornwallis, Sir Byam Martin, and Melville Islands, to which the
name of Parry's Archipelago has been given. In this short voyage he
gathered more new results than were obtained by his successors during
the next forty years. He was the first to traverse these seas. Upon Sir
Byam Martin Island he has described the ruins of some ancient
habitations of the Esquimaux. He passed the winter on Melville Island.
In order to attain his chosen anchorage in Winter's Bay, he was
compelled to saw a passage in the ice of a league in length, which
involved the labour of three days; but scarcely were they moored in
their chosen harbour than the thermometer fell to eighteen degrees below
zero. They carried ashore the ship's boats, the cables, the sails, and
log-books. The masts were struck to the maintop; the rest of the rigging
served to form a roof, sloping to the gunwale, with a thick covering of
sail-cloth, which formed an admirable shelter from the wind and snow.
Numberless precautions were taken against cold and wet under the decks.
Stoves and other contrivances maintained a supportable degree of
temperature. In each dormitory a false ceiling of impermeable cloth
interposed to prevent the collection of moisture on the wooden walls of
the ship. The crew were divided into companies, each company being under
the charge of an officer, charged with the daily inspection of their
clothes and cleanliness--an essential protection against scurvy. As a
measure of precaution, Captain Parry reduced by one-third the ordinary
ration of bread; beer and wine were substituted for spirits; and citron
and lemon drinks were served out daily to the sailors. Game was
sometimes substituted to vary a repast worthy of Spartans. As a remedy
against _ennui_, a theatre was fitted up and comedies acted, for which
occasions Parry himself composed a vaudeville, entitled "The North-west
Passage; or, the End of the Voyage." During this long night of
eighty-four days, the thermometer in the saloons marked 28°, and outside
35° below zero, and for a few minutes actually reached 47°. Some of the
sailors had their members frozen, from which they never quite recovered.
One day the hut which served as an observatory was discovered to be on
fire. A sailor who saved one of the precious instruments lost his hands
in the effort; they were completely frost-bitten in the attempt.

Nevertheless, the month of June arrived, and with it the opportunity of
making excursions in the neighbourhood. It was found that, in Melville
Island, the earth was carpeted with moss and herbage, with saxifrages
and poppies. Hares, reindeer, the musk-ox, northern geese, plovers,
white wolves and foxes, roamed around their haunts, disputing their
booty with the crew. Captain Parry could not risk a second winter in
this terrible region. He returned home as soon as the thaw left the
passage open.

In 1821, Captain Parry undertook a second voyage with the _Fury_ and
_Hecla_. He visited Hudson's Bay and Fox's Channel. In his third voyage,
undertaken in 1824, he was surprised by the frost in Prince Regent's
Channel, and was constrained to pass the winter there. The _Fury_ was
dismantled, and, being found unfit for service, Captain Parry was
obliged to abandon her and return to England.

Accompanied by Sir James Ross, Parry again put to sea in the _Hecla_, in
April, 1826. On his third voyage, on leaving Table Island on the north
of Spitzbergen, Parry placed his crew in the two training ships,
_Enterprise_ and _Endeavour_; the first under his own command, the
second under orders of Sir James Ross. Sometimes they sailed, sometimes
hauled through the crust of the ice; sometimes the ice, which pierced
their shoes, showed itself bristling with points, intersected into
valleys and little hills, which it was difficult to scale. In spite of
the courage and energy of their crews, the two ships scarcely advanced
four miles a day, while the drifting of the ice towards the south led
them imperceptibly towards their point of departure. They reached
latitude eighty-two degrees forty-five minutes fifteen seconds, however,
and this was the extreme point which they attained.

In the month of May, 1829, Sir John Ross, accompanied by his nephew,
James Clark Ross, again turned towards the Polar Seas. He entered Prince
Regent's Channel, and there he found the _Fury_, which had been
dismantled and abandoned by Parry, in these regions, eight years before.
The provisions, which the old ship still contained, were quite a
providential resource to Ross's crews. The distinguished navigator
explored the Boothian Peninsula, and passed four years consecutively in
Port Felix, without being able to disengage his vessel, the _Victory_.
This gave him ample leisure to become familiar with the Esquimaux. Sir
John Ross, in his account of this long sojourn in polar countries, has
recorded many conversations with the natives, which our space does not
permit us to quote. From this terrible position he was extricated, and
emerged with his crew from this icy prison, when all hope of his return
had been abandoned. After being exposed to a thousand dangers, Ross and
his crew were at last observed by a whaling ship, which received them on
board, after many efforts to attract attention. On learning that the
ship which had saved them was the _Isabella_, formerly commanded by
Captain Ross, he made himself known. "But Captain Ross has been dead two
years," was the reply.

We need not repeat here the enthusiastic reception Captain Ross and his
companions met with on their arrival in London.

During an excursion made by the nephew of the Commander (afterwards Sir
James Clark Ross), he very closely approached the North Magnetic Pole.
This was at eight o'clock on the morning of the 1st of June, 1831, on
the west coast of Boothia. The dip of the magnetic needle was nearly
vertical, being eighty-nine degrees fifty-nine seconds--one minute short
of ninety degrees. The site was a low flat shore, rising into ridges
from fifty to sixty feet high, and about a mile inland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Contrary to the judgment of many officers of experience in polar
explorations, the last and most fatal of all the expeditions was
undertaken by Sir John Franklin, with one hundred and thirty-seven
picked officers and men, in the ships _Erebus_ and _Terror_. The
adventurers left Sheerness on the 26th of May, 1846, the ships having
been strengthened in every conceivable way, and found in everything
calculated to secure the safety of the expedition. On the 22nd of July
the ships were spoken by the whaler _Enterprise_, and, four days later,
they were sighted by the _Prince of Wales_, of Hull, moored to an
iceberg, waiting an opening to enter Lancaster Sound. There the veil
dropped over the ships and their unhappy crews. In 1848, their fate
began to excite a lively interest in the public mind. Expedition in
search of them succeeded expedition, at immense cost, sent both by the
English and American authorities, and by Lady Franklin herself, some of
which penetrated the Polar Seas through Behring's Straits, while the
majority took Baffin's Bay. In 1850, Captains Ommaney and Penny
discovered, at the entrance of Wellington Channel, some vestiges of
Franklin, which led to another expedition in 1857, which was got up by
private enterprise, of which Captain M'Clintock had the command. Guided
by the indications collected in the previous expedition, and
intelligence gathered from the Esquimaux by Dr. Rae in his land
expedition, Captain M'Clintock in the yacht _Fox_ discovered, on the 6th
of May, 1859, upon the north point of King William's Land, a cairn or
heap of stones. Several leaves of parchment, which were buried under the
stones, bearing date the 28th of April, 1848, solved the fatal enigma.
The first, dated the 24th of May, 1847, gave some details ending with
"all well." The papers had been dug up twelve months later to record the
death of Franklin, on the 11th of June, 1847. The survivors are supposed
to have been on their way to the mouth of the River Back, but they must
have sunk under the terrible hardships to which they were exposed, in
addition to cold and hunger.

In September, 1859, Captain M'Clintock returned to England, bringing
with him many relics of our lost countrymen, found in the theatre of
their misfortunes.

It only remains to us to say a few words on the latest voyages
undertaken in the Polar Seas. After the return of Captain M'Clintock, in
1850, Captain M'Clure, leaving Behring's Straits, discovered the
north-west passage between Melville and Baring's Island, which passage
had been sought for without success during so many ages. He saw the
thermometer descend fifty degrees below zero. In the month of October,
1854, he returned to England, and at a subsequent period it was
ascertained with certainty that, before his death, Franklin knew of the
other passage which exists to the north of America, to the south of
Victoria Land, and Wollaston.

The expedition of Dr. Kane entered Smith's Strait in 1853, and advanced
towards the north upon sledges drawn by dogs; the mean temperature,
which ranged between thirty degrees and forty degrees below zero, fell
at last to fifty degrees. At eleven degrees from the Pole they found two
Esquimaux villages, called Etah and Peterovik, then an immense glacier.
A detachment, conducted by Lieutenant Morton, discovered, beyond the
eightieth degree of latitude, an open channel inhabited by innumerable
swarms of birds, consisting of swallows, ducks, and gulls, which
delighted them by their shrill, piercing cries. Seals (_phoca_) enjoyed
themselves on the floating ice. In ascending the banks, they met with
flowering plants, such as _Lychnis_, _Hesperis_, &c. On the 24th of
June, Morton hoisted the flag of the _Antarctic_, which had before this
seen the ice of the South Pole, on Cape Independence, situated beyond
eighty-one degrees. To the north stretched the open sea. On the left was
the western bank of the Kennedy Channel, which seemed to terminate in a
chain of mountains, the principal peak rising from nine thousand to ten
thousand feet, which was named Mount Parry. The expedition returned
towards the south, and reached the port of Uppernavick exhausted with
hunger, where it was received on board an American ship. Dr. Kane,
weakened by his sufferings, from which he never quite recovered, died in
1857.

We cannot conclude this rapid sketch of events connected with the
expeditions to the Arctic Pole without noting a geological fact of great
and singular interest. When opportunities have presented themselves of
examining the rocks in the regions adjoining the North Pole, it has been
found that great numbers belong to the coal measures. Such is the case
in Melville Island and Prince Patrick's Island. Under the ice which
covers the soil in these islands coal exists, with all the fossil
vegetable débris which invariably accompany it. This shows that in the
coal period of geology, the North Pole was covered with the rich and
abundant vegetation whose remains constitute the coal-fields of the
present day; and proves to demonstration that the temperature of these
regions was, at one period of the earth's history, equal to that of
equatorial countries of the present day. What a wonderful change in the
temperature of these regions is thus indicated! It is, indeed, a strange
contrast to find coal formations under the soil covered by the polar
ice. Let us suppose that human industry should dream of establishing
itself in these countries, and drawing from the earth the combustible so
needed to make it habitable, thus furnishing the means of overcoming the
rigorous climatic conditions of these inhospitable regions.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Antarctic Pole is probably surrounded by an icy canopy not less than
two thousand five hundred miles in diameter; and numerous circumstances
lead to the conclusion that the vast mass has diminished since 1774,
when the region was visited by Captain Cook. The Antarctic region can
only be approached during the summer, namely, in December, January, and
February.

The first navigator who penetrated the Antarctic circle was the Dutch
captain, Theodoric de Gheritk, whose vessel formed part of the squadron
commanded by Simon de Cordes, destined for the East Indies. In January,
1600, a tempest having dispersed the squadron, Captain Gheritk was
driven as far south as the sixty-fourth parallel, where he observed a
coast which reminded him of Norway. It was mountainous, covered with
snow, stretching from the coast to the Isles of Solomon. The report of
Simon de Cordes was received with great incredulity, and the doubts
raised were only dissipated when the New South Shetland Islands were
definitely recognized. The idea of an Antarctic continent is, however,
one of the oldest conceptions of speculative geography, and one which
mariners and philosophers alike have found it most difficult to
relinquish. The existence of a southern continent seemed to them to be
the necessary counterpoise to the Arctic land. The _Terra Australis
incognita_ is marked on all the maps of Mercator, round the South Pole,
and when the Dutch officer, Kerguelen, discovered, in 1772, the island
which bears his name, he quoted this idea of Mercator as the motive
which suggested the voyage. In 1774, Captain Cook ventured up to and
beyond the seventy-first degree of latitude under the one hundred and
ninth degree west longitude. He traversed a hundred and eighty leagues,
between the fiftieth degree and sixtieth degree of south latitude,
without finding the land of which mariners had spoken: this led him to
conclude that mountains of ice, or the great fog-banks of the region,
had been mistaken for a continent. Nevertheless, Cook clung to the idea
of the existence of a southern continent. "I firmly believe," he says,
"that near the Pole there is land where most part of the ice is formed
which is spread over the vast Southern Ocean. I cannot believe that the
ice could extend itself so far if it had not land--and I venture to say
land of considerable extent--to the south. I believe, nevertheless, that
the greater part of this southern continent ought to lie within the
Polar Circle, where the sea is so encumbered with ice as to be
unapproachable. The danger run in surveying a coast in these unknown
seas is so great, that I dare to say no one will venture to go farther
than I have, and that the land that lies to the south will always remain
unknown. The fogs are there too dense; the snowstorms and tempests too
frequent; the cold too severe; all the dangers of navigation too
numerous. The appearance of the coast is the most horrible that can be
imagined. The country is condemned by nature to remain unvisited by the
sun, and buried under eternal hoar frost. After this report, I believe
that we shall hear no more of a southern continent." This description of
these desolate regions, to which the great navigator might have applied
the words of Pliny, "_Pars mundi a natura damnata et densa mersa
caligine_," only excited the courage of his successors. In our days,
several expeditions have been fitted out for the express survey of
regions which may be characterised as the abode of cold, silence, and
death. In 1833, a free passage opened itself into the Antarctic Sea. The
Scottish whaling ship, commanded by James Weddell, entered the pack ice,
and penetrated it in pursuit of seals; but having, by chance, found the
sea open on his course, he forced his way up to seventy-four degrees
south latitude, and under the thirty-fourth degree of longitude, but the
season was too advanced, and he and his crew retraced their steps. The
voyage of Captain Weddell caused a great sensation, and suggested the
possibility of more serious expeditions. Twelve years later three great
expeditions were fitted out: one, under Dumont D'Urville, of the French
Marine; an American expedition, under Captain Wilkes, of the United
States Navy; and an English expedition, under Sir James Clark Ross.

Dumont D'Urville, who perished so miserably in the railway catastrophe
at Versailles, in 1842, passed the Straits of Magellan on the 9th of
January, 1838, having under his command the two corvettes _Astrolabe_
and _Zelée_. He expected to find it as Weddell had described, and that,
after passing the first icy barrier, he should find an open sea before
him. But he was soon compelled to renounce this hope. The floating
icebergs became more and more closely packed and dangerous. The southern
icebergs do not circulate in straits and channels already formed, like
those of the North Pole, but in enormous detached blocks which hug the
land. Sometimes in shallow water they form belts parallel to the base of
the cliffs, intersected by a small number of sinuous narrow channels.
These icy cliffs present a face more or less disintegrated as they
approximate to the rocky shore. The blocks of ice form at first huge
prisms, or tabular, regular masses of a whitish paste; but they get used
up by degrees, and rounded off and separated under the action of the
waves, which chafe them, and their colour becomes more and more limpid
and bluish. They ascend freely towards the north, in spite of the winds
and currents which carry them in the contrary direction. One year with
another these floating icebergs accumulate with very striking
differences, and it is only by a rare chance that they open up a free
passage such as Captain Weddell had discovered. These floating islands
of ice have been met with in thirty-five degrees south latitude, and
even as high as Cape Horn.

The two French ships frequently found themselves shut up in the
icebergs, which continued to press upon them, and driven before the
north winds, until the south wind again dispersed their vast masses,
enabling them to issue from their prison in health and safety. In some
cases D'Urville found it necessary to force his ship through fields of
ice by which he was surrounded and imprisoned, and to cut his way by
force through the accumulating blocks, using the corvette as a sort of
battering-ram. In 1838 he recognized, about fifty leagues from the South
Orkney Isles, a coast, to which he gave the name of _Louis Philippe's_
and _Joinville's Land_. This coast is covered with enormous masses of
ice, which seemed to rise to the height of two thousand six hundred
feet. Ross discovered still more lofty peaks, such as Mount Penny and
Mount Haddington, rising about seven thousand feet. The English
navigator states that this land is only a great island. The crew of
D'Urville's ship being sickly and overworked, he returned to the port of
Chili, whence he again issued for the South Pole in the following
January.

On this occasion his approach was made from a point diametrically
opposite to the former. He very soon found himself in the middle of the
ice. He discovered within the Antarctic Circle land, to which he gave
the name of _Adelia's Land_. The long and lofty cliffs of this island or
continent he describes as being surrounded by a belt of islands of ice
at once numerous and threatening. D'Urville did not hesitate to navigate
his corvettes through the middle of the band of enormous icebergs which
seemed to guard the Pole and forbid his approach to it. For some moments
his vessels were so surrounded that they had reason to fear, from moment
to moment, some terrible shock, some irreparable disaster. In addition
to this, the sea produces around these floating icebergs, eddies, which
were not unlikely to draw on the ship to the destruction with which it
was threatened at every instant. It was in passing at their base that
D'Urville was able to judge of the height of these icy cliffs. "The
walls of these blocks of ice," he says, "far exceed our masts and
riggings in height; they overhang our ships, whose dimensions seem
ridiculously curtailed. We seem to be traversing the narrow streets of
some city of giants. At the foot of these gigantic monuments we perceive
vast caverns hollowed by the waves, which are engulfed there with a
crashing tumult. The sun darts his oblique rays upon the immense walls
of ice as if it were crystal, presenting effects of light and shade
truly magical and startling. From the summit of these mountains,
numerous brooks, fed by the melting ice produced by the summer heat of a
January sun in these regions, throw themselves in cascades into the icy
sea.

"Occasionally these icebergs approach each other so as to conceal the
land entirely, and we only perceive two walls of threatening ice, whose
sonorous echoes send back the word of command of the officers. The
corvette which followed the _Astrolabe_ appeared so small, and its masts
so slender, that the ship's crew were seized with terror. For nearly an
hour we only saw vertical walls of ice." Ultimately they reached a vast
basin, formed on one side by the chain of floating islands which they
had traversed, and on the other by high land rising three and four
thousand feet, rugged and undulating on the surface, but clothed over
all with an icy mantle, which was rendered dazzlingly imposing in its
whiteness by the rays of the sun. The officers could only advance by the
ship's boats through a labyrinth of icebergs up to a little islet lying
opposite to the coast. They touched the land at this islet; the French
flag was planted, possession was taken of the new continent, and, in
proof of possession, some portions of rock were torn from the scarped
and denuded cliffs. These rocks are composed of quartzite and gneiss.
The southern continent, therefore, belongs to the primitive formation,
while the northern region belongs in great part to the transition, or
coal formation. According to the map of Adelia's Land, traced by
D'Urville over an extent of thirty leagues of country, the region is one
of death and desolation, without any trace of vegetation.

A little more to the north, the French navigator had a vague vision on
the white lines of the horizon of another land, which he named _Côte
Clarie_, or Coast Clear, the existence of which was soon confirmed by
the American expedition under Commodore Wilkes. This officer has
explored the southern land on a larger scale than any other navigator,
but he suffered himself to be led into error by the dense fogs of the
region, and has laid down coast lines on his map where Sir James Boss
subsequently found only open sea--an error which has very unjustly
thrown discredit on the whole expedition.

The English expedition entered this region on Christmas Day, 1840, which
was passed by Ross in a strong gale, with constant snow or rain. Soon
after, the first icebergs were seen, having flat tabular summits, in
some instances two miles in circumference, bounded on all sides by
perpendicular cliffs. On New Year's Day, 1841, the ships crossed the
Antarctic Circle, and reached the edge of the pack ice, which they
entered, after skirting it for several days. On the 5th, the pack was
passed through, amid blinding snow and thick fog, which on clearing away
revealed an open sea, and on the 11th of January land was seen directly
ahead of the ships. A coast line rose in lofty snow-covered peaks at a
great distance. On a nearer view, this coast is thus described: "It was
a beautifully clear evening, and two magnificent ranges of mountains
rose to elevations varying from seven thousand to ten thousand feet
above the level of the sea." The glaciers which filled their intervening
valleys, and which descended from near the mountain summits, projected
in many places several miles into the sea, and terminated in lofty
perpendicular cliffs. In a few places the rocks broke through their icy
covering, by which alone we could be assured that lava formed the
nucleus of this, to all appearance, enormous iceberg. This antarctic
land was named Victoria Land, in honour of the Queen. It was coasted up
to latitude seventy-eight degrees south, and near to this a magnificent
volcanic mountain presented itself, rising twelve thousand feet above
the level of the sea, which emitted flame and smoke in splendid
profusion. The flanks of this gigantic mountain were clothed with snow
almost to the mouth of the crater from which the flaming smoke issued.
At a short distance, Ross discovered the cone of an extinct, or, at
least, inactive volcano nearly as lofty. He gave to these two volcanoes
the names of his vessels, _Erebus_ and _Terror_ (Fig. 9)--names
perfectly in harmony with the surrounding desolation. The ice-covered
cliffs rose about a hundred and ninety feet high, and appear to be about
three hundred feet deep, soundings being found at about four hundred
fathoms. In the distance, towards the south, a range of lofty mountains
were observed, which Ross named _Mount Parry_, in honour of his old
commander. When Ross retraced his steps, the expedition had advanced as
far as the seventy-ninth degree of south latitude.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. Mounts Erebus and Terror.]

       *       *       *       *       *

It may be said of polar countries, that they form a transition state
between land and sea, for water is always present, although in a solid
state; the surface is always at a very low temperature; snow does not
melt as it falls, and the sea is thus sometimes covered with a
continuous sheet of frozen snow; sometimes with enormous floating blocks
of ice which are driven by the currents. Meeting with these floating
masses of ice is one of the dangers of polar navigation. Captain
Scoresby has given a very detailed description of the different kinds of
ice met with in the Arctic Seas. The ice-fields of this writer form
extensive masses of solid water, of which the eye cannot trace the
limits, some of them being thirty-five leagues in length and ten broad,
with a thickness of seven to eight fathoms; but generally these
ice-fields rise only four to six feet above the water, and reach from
three to four fathoms beneath the surface. Scoresby has seen these
ice-fields forming in the open sea. When the first crystals appear, the
surface of the ocean is cold enough to prevent snow from melting as it
falls. On the approach of congelation the surface solidifies, and seems
as if covered with oil; small circles are formed, which press against
each other, and are finally soldered together until they form a vast
field of ice, the thickness of which increases from the lower surface.

The water produced from melted ice is perfectly fresh--the result of a
well-known physical cause. When a saline solution like sea water is
congealed by cold, pure water alone passes into the solid state, the
saline solution becomes more concentrated, increases in density, and,
sinking to the bottom, remains liquid. Blocks of ice, therefore, in the
Polar Seas, are always available for domestic use. There are, however,
salt blocks of ice, which are distinguished from fresh-water ice by
their opaqueness and their dazzling white colour: this saltness is due
to the sea water retained in its interstices. Scoresby amused himself
sometimes by shaping lenses of ice, with which he is said to have set
fire to gunpowder, much to the astonishment of his crew.

The ice-fields, which are formed in higher latitudes, are driven towards
the south by winds and currents, but sooner or later the action of the
waves breaks them up into fragments. The edges of the broken icebergs
are thus often rising and continually changing: these asperities and
protuberances are called _hummocks_ by English navigators; they give to
the polar ice an odd, irregular appearance. Hummocks form themselves of
the stray, broken icebergs which come in contact with each other at
their edges, and thus form vast rafts, the pieces of which may exceed a
hundred yards in length.

When these icebergs are separated by open spaces, through which vessels
can be navigated, the pack ice is said to be open. But it often happens
that mountains of ice occur partly submerged, where one edge is retained
under the principal mass, while the other is above the water. Scoresby
once passed over a _calf_, as English mariners call these icy mountains,
but he trembled while he did so, dreading lest it should throw his
vessel, himself, and crew into the air before he could pass it. The
aspect of the ice-fields varies in a thousand ways. Here it is an
incoherent chaos resembling some volcanic rocks, with crevices in all
directions, bristling with unshapely blocks piled up at random; there it
is a strongly-marked plain, an immense mosaic formed of vast blocks of
ice of every age and thickness, the divisions of which are marked by
long ridges of the most irregular forms; sometimes resembling walls
composed of great rectangular blocks, sometimes resembling chains of
hills, with great rounded summits.

In the spring, when a thaw sets in, and the fields begin to break up,
the pieces of light ice which unite the great blocks into unique masses
are the first to melt; the several blocks then separate, and the motion
of the water soon disperses them, and the imprisoned ships find a free
passage. But a day of calm is still sufficient to unite the dispersed
masses, which oscillate and grind against each other with a strange
noise, which sailors compare to the yelping of young dogs.

When a ship is shut up in one of these floating ice-fields, inexplicable
changes sometimes occur in the vast incoherent aggregations. Vessels,
which think themselves immovable, are found in a few hours to have
completely reversed their positions. Two ships shut in at a short
distance from each other were driven many leagues without being able to
perceive any change in the surrounding ice. At other times ships are
drawn with the floating ice-fields, like the white bears, who make long
voyages at sea upon these monster vehicles. In 1777 the Dutch vessel,
the _Wilhelmina_, was driven with some other whaling ships from eighty
degrees north back to sixty-two degrees, in sight of the Iceland coast.
During this terrible journey the ships were broken up one after the
other. More than two hundred persons perished, and the remainder reached
land with difficulty.

Lieutenant De Haven, navigating in search of Sir John Franklin, was
caught in the ice in the middle of the channel in Wellington Strait.
During the nine months which he remained in captivity, he drifted nearly
thirteen hundred miles towards the south; and the ship _Resolute_,
abandoned by Captain Kellet in an ice-field of immense extent, was
drifted towards the south with this vast mass to a much greater
distance.

Some curious speculations are hazarded by Dr. Maury, arising out of his
investigations of winds and currents, facts being revealed which
indicate the existence of a climate, mild by comparison, within the
Antarctic Circle. These indications are a low barometer, a high degree
of aerial rarefaction, and strong winds from the north. "The winds," he
says, "were the first to whisper of this strange state of things, and to
intimate to us that the Antarctic climates are in winter very unlike the
Arctic for rigour and severity." The result of an immense mass of
observation on the polar and equatorial winds reveals a marked
difference in atmospherical movements north, as compared with the same
movements south of the Equator; the equatorial winds of the northern
hemisphere being only in excess between the tenth and thirteenth
parallel, while those of the southern hemisphere are dominant over a
zone of forty-five degrees, or from thirty-five degrees south to ten
degrees north.

"The fact that the influence of the polar indraught upon the winds
should extend from the Antarctic to the parallel of forty degrees south,
while that from the Arctic is so feeble as scarcely to be felt in fifty
degrees north, is indicative enough as to the difference in degree of
aerial rarefaction over the two regions. The significance of the fact is
enhanced by the consideration that the 'brave west winds,' which are
bound to the place of greatest rarefaction, rush more violently and
constantly along to their destination than do the counter-trades of the
northern hemisphere. Why should these polar-bound winds differ so much
in strength and prevalence, unless there be a much more abundant supply
of caloric, and, consequently, a higher degree of rarefaction, at one
pole than at the other?"

That this is the case is confirmed by all known barometrical
observations, which are very much lower in the Antarctic than in the
Arctic, and Dr. Maury thinks this is doubtless due to the excess in
Antarctic regions of aqueous vapour and this latent heat.

"There is rarefaction in the Arctic regions. The winds show it, the
barometer attests it, and the fact is consistent with the Russian theory
of a Polynia in polar waters. Within the Antarctic Circle, on the
contrary, the winds bring air which has come over the water for the
distance of hundreds of leagues all around; consequently, a large
portion of atmospheric air is driven away from the austral regions by
the force of vapour."




CHAPTER III.

LIFE IN THE OCEAN.

    "See what a lovely shell, small and pure as a pearl,
    Frail, but a work divine, made so fairly well,
    With delicate spore and whorl, a miracle of design."

    TENNYSON.


"The appearance of the open sea," says Frédol, from whose elegant work
this chapter is chiefly compiled, "far from the shore--the boundless
ocean--is to the man who loves to create a world of his own, in which he
can freely exercise his thoughts, filled with sublime ideas of the
Infinite. His searching eye rests upon the far-distant horizon. He sees
there the ocean and the heavens meeting in a vapoury outline, where the
stars ascend and descend, appear and disappear in their turn. Presently
this everlasting change in nature awakens in him a vague feeling of that
sadness 'which,' says Humboldt, 'lies at the root of all our heartfelt
joys.'"

Emotions of another kind and equally serious are produced by the
contemplation and study of the habits of the innumerable organized
beings which inhabit the great deep. In fact, that immense expanse of
water, which we call the sea, is no vast liquid desert; life dwells in
its bosom as it does on dry land. Here this mystery reigns supreme in
the midst of its expansions, luxuries, and agitations. It pleases the
Creator. It is the most beautiful, the most brilliant, the noblest, and
the most incomprehensible of His manifestations. Without life, the world
would be as nothing. The beings endowed with it transmit it faithfully
to other beings, their children, and their successors, which will be,
like them, the depositaries of the same mysterious gift; the marvellous
heritage thus traverses years and hundreds of years without losing its
powers; the globe is redolent with the life which has been so
bounteously distributed over it. In the words of Lamartine, "We know
what produces life, but we know not what it is;" and this ignorance is
perhaps the powerful attraction which provokes our curiosity and excites
us to study.

Every living being is animated by two principles, between which a silent
but incessant combat is being carried on--_life_, which assimilates, and
_death_, which disintegrates. At first, life is all powerful--it lords
it over matter; but its reign is limited. Beyond a certain point its
vigour is gradually impaired; with old age it decays; and is finally
extinguished with time, when the chemical and physical laws seize upon
it, and its organization is destroyed. But the elements, though inert at
first, are soon reanimated and occupied with a new life. Every plant,
every animal is bound up with the past, and is part of the future, for
every generation which starts into life is only the corollary upon that
which expires, and the prelude of another which is about to be born.
Life is the school of death; death is the foster-mother of life.

Life, however, does not always exhibit itself at the moment of its
formation. It is visible later, and only after other phenomena. In order
to develope itself, a suitable soil or other medium must be prepared,
and other determinate physical and chemical conditions provided. The
presence and diffusion of living beings are no chance products; they
follow rigorously an order of law. Speaking of the higher forms of
animal life, the Duke of Argyll says, in his able and satisfactory work,
"The Reign of Law,"--"In all these there is an observed order in the
most rigid scientific sense, that is, phenomena in uniform connexion and
mutual relations which can be made, and are made, the basis of
systematic classification. These classifications are imperfect, not
because they are founded on ideal connexions where none exist, but only
because they fail in representing adequately the subtle and pervading
order which binds together all living things."

The knowledge of fossils has thrown great light upon the regular and
progressive development of organization. The evolution of living beings
seems to have commenced with the more rudimentary forms; the more
ancient rocks, until very recently, had revealed no traces of life, and
what has been revealed tends to confirm this view. In the Cambrian rocks
of Bray Head, county Wicklow, the _Oldhamia_ is a zoophyte of the
simplest organization, and the Rhizapods found near the bottom of the
Azoic rocks of Canada are the lowest form of living types; and it is
only in beds of comparatively recent formation that complex organization
exists. Vegetables first show themselves, and even among these the
simplest forms have priority. Animals afterwards appear, which, as we
have seen, belong to the least perfect classes. The combinations of
life, at first simple, have become more and more complex, until the
creation of man, who may be considered the masterpiece of organization.

If we expose a certain quantity of pure water to the light and air in
the spring, we should soon see it producing shades of a yellowish or
greenish colour. These spots, examined through the microscope, reveal
thousands of vegetable agglomerates. Presently thousands of animalcules
appear, which swim about among the floating masses, nourishing
themselves with its substance. Other animalcules then appear, which, in
their turn, pursue and devour the first.

In short, life transforms inanimate into organized matter. Vegetables
appear first, then come herbivorous animals, and then come the
carnivorous. Life maintains life. The death of one gives food and
development to others, for all are bound up together--all assist at the
metamorphoses continually occurring in the organic as in the mineral
world, the result being general and profound harmony--harmony always
worthy of admiration. The Creator alone is unchangeable, omnipotent, and
permanent; all else is transition.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of the water are much more numerous than those of the
solid earth. "Upon a surface less varied than we find on continents,"
says Humboldt, "the sea contains in its bosom an exuberance of life of
which no other portion of the globe could give us any idea. It expands
in the north as in the south; in the east as in the west. The seas,
above all, abound with it; in the bosom of the deep, creatures
corresponding and harmonizing with each other sport and play. Among
these especially the naturalist finds instruction, and the philosopher
subjects for meditation. The changes they undergo only impress upon our
minds more and more a sentiment of thankfulness to the Author of the
universe."

Yes, the ocean in its profoundest depths--its plains and its mountains,
its valleys, its precipices, even in its ruins--is animated and
embellished by innumerable organized beings. These are at first plants,
solitary or social, erect or drooping, spreading into prairies, grouped
in patches, or forming vast forests in the oceanic valleys. These
submarine forests protect and nourish millions of animals which creep,
which run, which swim, which sink into the sands, attach themselves to
rocks, lodge themselves in crevices, which construct dwellings for
themselves, which seek for or fly from each other, which pursue or
fight, caress each other lovingly, or devour each other without pity.
Charles Darwin truly remarks somewhere that our terrestrial forests do
not maintain nearly so many living beings as those which swarm in the
bosom of the sea. The ocean, which for man is the region of asphyxia and
death, is for millions of animals the region of life and health: there
is enjoyment for myriads in its waves; there is happiness on its banks;
there is the blue above all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sea influences its numerous inhabitants, animal or vegetable, by its
temperature, by its density, by its saltness, by its bitterness, by the
never-ceasing agitation of its waves, and by the rapidity of its
currents.

We have seen in preceding chapters that the sea only freezes under
intense cold, and then only at the surface, and that at the depth of
five hundred fathoms the same permanent temperature exists in all
latitudes. On the other hand, it is agreed that the agitations produced
by the most violent storms are never felt beyond the depth of twelve or
thirteen fathoms. From this it follows that animals and vegetables, by
descending more or less, according to the cold or disturbing movements,
can always reach a medium which agrees with their constitutions.

The hosts of the sea are distinguished by a peculiar softness. Certain
pelagic plants present only a very weak, feeble consistence; a great
number are transformed by ebullition into a sort of jelly. The flesh of
marine animals is more or less flaccid; many seem to consist of a
diaphanous mucilage. The skeleton of the more perfect species is more or
less flexible and cartilaginous; and it rarely attains, as to weight and
consistency, the strength of bone exhibited by terrestrial vertebrate
animals. Nevertheless, both the shells and coral produced in the bosom
of the ocean are remarkable for their stony solidity. Among marine
bodies, in short, we find at once the softest and hardest of organized
substances.

The separation of organized beings, nourished by the ocean, is
subjected to certain fixed laws. We never find on the coast, except by
evident accident, the same species that we meet with far from the shore;
nor on the surface, creatures whose habits lead them to hide in the
depths of ocean. What immense varieties of size, shape, form, and
colour, from the nearly invisible vegetation which serves to nourish the
small zoophytes and mollusks, to the long, slender algæ of fifty--and
even five hundred--yards in length! How vast the disparity between the
microscopic infusoria and the gigantic whale!

"We find in the sea," says Lacepede, "unity and diversity, which
constitute its beauty; grandeur and simplicity, which give it sublimity;
puissance and immensity, which command our wonder."

In the following pages we shall figure and describe many inhabitants of
the sea; but how many remain still to figure and describe! During more
than two thousand years research has been multiplied, and succeeded by
research without interruption. "But how vast the field," as Lamarck
observes, "which Science has still to cultivate, in order to carry the
knowledge already acquired to the degree of perfection of which it is
susceptible!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"When the tide retires from the shore, the sea leaves upon the coast
some few of the numberless beings which it bears in its bosom. In the
first moments of its retreat, the naturalist may collect a crowd of
substances, vegetable and animal, with their various characteristic
colours and properties. The inhabitants of the coast find there their
food, their commerce, and their occupations. At low water the nearest
villages and hamlets send their contingents, old and young, men, women,
and children, to the harvest. Some apply themselves to gathering the
riband seaweed (_Zostera_), the membranous _Ulva_, the sombre brown
_Fucus vesiculosus_, formerly a source of great wealth to the dwellers
by the sea, being then much used in making kelp; others gather the small
shells left on the sands; boys mount upon the rocks in search of whelks
(_Buccinum_), mussels (_Mytilus_), detach limpets (_Patella_), and other
edible marine animals, from the rocks to which they have attached
themselves. On some coasts, shells, as _Mactra_, _Cytheria_, and
_Bucardium_, are sought for their beauty. By turning the stones, or by
sounding the crevices of the rocks with a hook at the end of a lath,
polypes and calmars are sometimes surprised--sometimes even sea and
conger eels, which have sought refuge there; while the pools, left here
and there by the retiring tide, are dragged by nets of very small mesh,
in which the smaller crustaceous mollusks and small fish are secured."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Mediterranean and other inland seas, where the tide is almost
inappreciable, there exist a great number of animals and vegetables
belonging to the deep sea, which the waves or currents very rarely leave
upon the sea shore. There are others so fugitive, or which attach
themselves so firmly to the rocks, that we can watch them only in their
habitats. It is necessary to study them floating on the surface of the
waves, or in their mysterious retirements. Hence the necessity that
naturalists should study the living productions of the salt water even
in the bosom of the ocean, and not on the sea shore.

The means generally employed for this purpose is a drag-net,
sounding-line, and other engines suitable for scraping the bottom, and
breaking the harder rocks. In a voyage which Milne Edwards made to the
coast of Sicily, he formed the idea of employing an apparatus invented
by Colonel Paulin, which consisted of a metallic casque provided with a
visor of glass, and consequently transparent, which fixed itself round
the neck by means of a copper collar made water-tight by stuffing--a
diving-bell, in short, in miniature. It communicated with an air-pump by
means of a flexible tube. Four men were employed in serving the pump,
two exercising it while the other two rested themselves. Other men held
the extremity of a cord, which was passed over a pulley attached at a
higher elevation, and enabled them to hoist up the diver with the
necessary rapidity in emergencies. A vigilant observer held in his hand
a small signal cord. The immersion of the diver was facilitated by heavy
leaden shoes, which assisted him at the same time to maintain his
vertical position at the bottom. M. Edwards made the descent with this
apparatus in three fathoms water with perfect success. He was thus
enabled to study, in their most hidden and most inaccessible retreats,
the radiate animals, mollusks, crustaceans, and annelids, especially
their larvæ and eggs, and by his descriptions to contribute most
essentially to make known the functions, manners, and mode of
development of certain inhabitants of the sea, whose sojourn and habits
would seem to sequestrate them for ever from our observation.

Another and easier mode of studying the living creatures sheltered by
the sea was first suggested by M. Charles des Moulins of Bordeaux, in
1830. The _aquarium_, which is charged with fresh or salt water,
according to the beings it is intended to contain, serves the same
purpose for the inhabitants of the deep which the aviary does for the
birds of the air--cages of glass being used in place of iron wire or
wicker-work, and water in place of atmospheric air.

When a globe is filled with fresh water, and with mollusks, crustaceans,
or fishes, it is observed, after a few days, that the water loses its
transparency and purity, and becomes slightly corrupt. It necessarily
follows that the water must be changed from time to time. Changing the
water, however, causes much suffering, and even death to the animals.
Besides, the new water does not always present the same composition, the
same aeration, or the same temperature with that which is replaced. To
obviate this defect, and taking a leaf out of Nature's book, M. Moulins
proposed to put into the vase a certain number of aquatic plants
floating or submerged--duckweed, for example--which would act upon the
water in a direction inverse to that of the animals inhabiting it. It is
known that vegetables assimilate carbon, while decomposing the carbonic
acid produced by the respiration of animals, thus disengaging the oxygen
indispensable to animal life. In this simple manner was the necessary
change of water obviated. The same happy idea has been successfully
applied to salt water, and aquariums for salt-water plants and animals
have been proposed on a great scale. That of the Zoological Gardens of
Paris, in the Bois de Boulogne, inaugurated in 1861, is perhaps the
largest in the world. It is a solid stone building of fifty yards in
length by about twelve broad, presenting a range of forty reservoirs of
Angers slate, running north and south. The reservoirs are nearly
cubical, presenting in front the strong glass of Saint Gobain, which
permits of the interior being seen. They are lighted from above; but the
light is weak, greenish, uniform, and consequently mysterious and
gloomy, giving a pretty exact imitation of the submarine light some
fathoms down. Each reservoir contains about two hundred gallons of
water. It is furnished with rocks disposed a little in the form of an
amphitheatre, and in a picturesque manner. Upon the rocks various
species of marine vegetables are planted. The bottom is of shingle,
gravel, and sand, in order to give certain animals a sufficiently
natural retreat.

Ten of these reservoirs are intended for marine animals. The water
employed is never changed, but it is kept in continual agitation by
circulation, produced by a current of water led from the great pipe
which feeds the Bois de Boulogne. This water, being subjected to a
strong pressure, compresses a certain portion of air, which, being
permitted to act on a portion of the sea water contained in a closed
cylinder placed below the level of the aquarium, makes it ascend, and
enter with great force into a reservoir, into which it is thrown from a
small jet. The sea water thus pressed absorbs a portion of the air,
which is drawn with it into the reservoir. A tube placed in a corner of
the reservoir receives the overflow, and conducts it into a closed
carbon filter, whence it passes into a gravelly underground reservoir,
returning again to the closed cylinder. The water is once more subjected
to the pressure of air, and again ascends to the aquarium. The cylinder
being underground, a temperature equal to about sixteen degrees Cent.,
which is nearly the uniform temperature of the ocean, is easily
maintained. During winter, the aquarium is heated artificially.




CHAPTER IV.

ZOOPHYTES.

    "Nature is nowhere more perfect than in her smaller works."
    "Natura nusquam magis quàm in minimis tota est."

    PLINY.


It will not be out of place here to offer some remarks on animals in
general, including the whole kingdom as well as the great divisions
which form the subject of this particular volume. But considering the
vastness of the subject, and our imperfect knowledge of the whole animal
series as a subject of study, nothing is more difficult than to seize
upon the real analogies between beings of types so varied,--of
organizations so dissimilar. The arrangements which naturalists have
established in order to study and describe animals--the divisions,
classes, orders, families, genera, and species--are admirable
contrivances for facilitating the study of creatures numerous as the
sands of the sea shore. Without this precious means of logical
distribution, the individual mind would recoil before the task of
describing the innumerable phalanges of contemporary animal life. But
the reader must never forget that these methodical divisions are pure
fictions, due to human invention: they form no part of nature; for has
not Linnæus told us that nature makes no leaps, _natura non facit
saltus_? Nature passes in a manner almost insensibly from one stage of
organization to another, altogether irrespective of human systems.

Moreover, when we come to watch the confines of the animal and vegetable
kingdom, we realise how difficult it is to seize the precise line of
demarcation which separates the great kingdoms of Nature. We have seen
in the "Vegetable World" germs of the simplest organization, as in the
Cryptogamia, spores, as in the Algæ, and fruitful corpuscles, as in the
Mosses, which seem to be invested with some of the characteristics of
animal life, for they appear to be gifted with organs of locomotion,
namely, vibratile cilia, by means of which they execute movements which
are to all appearance quite voluntary. Side by side with these are
vegetable germs and fecundating corpuscles, known as _antherozoides_
among the Algæ, Mosses, and Ferns, which, when floating in water, go and
come like the inferior animals, seeking to penetrate into cavities,
withdrawing themselves, returning again, and again introducing
themselves, and exhibiting all the signs of an apparent effort. Let us
compare the Infusoria, or even the Polypi and Gorgons, with these
shifting vegetable organisms, and say if it is easy to determine,
without considerable study, which is the plant and which the animal. The
precise line of demarcation which it is so desirable to establish
between the two kingdoms of Nature is indeed difficult to trace.

The word _zoophyte_, to which this comparison introduces us, seems very
happily applied: it is derived from the Greek word ζῶον, animal, and
φυτὸν, _plant_; and is, as it seems to us, quite worthy of being
retained in Science, because it consecrates and materialises, so to
speak, a sort of fusion between the two kingdoms of Nature at their
confines. Let us guard ourselves, however, from carrying this idea too
far, and, upon the faith of a happy word, altering altogether the true
relations of created beings. In adopting the name _zoophyte_, to
indicate a great division of the animal kingdom, the reader must not
imagine that there is any ambiguity about the creatures designated, or
that they belong at once to both kingdoms, or that they might be ranged
indifferently in the one or the other. Zoophytes are animals, and
nothing but animals; the justification for using a designation which
signifies animal-plant is, that many of them have an exterior
resemblance to plants; that they divide themselves by offshoots, as some
plants do, and are sometimes crowned with organs tinted with lively
colours, like some flowers.

This analogy between plants and zoophytes is nowhere more apparent than
in the coral. Rooted in the soil and upon rocks, the form of its
branches many times subdivided, above all, the coloured appendages which
at certain periods so closely resemble the corolla of a flower, have all
the form and appearance of plants. Until the eighteenth century most
naturalists classed the coral as Linnæus did, without the least
hesitation, with analogous creations in the vegetable world. Réaumur
long contended for the contrary opinion; but it is only in our day that
the animal nature of the coral is satisfactorily established. The _sea
anemone_ may be cited as another striking example of the resemblance
borne by certain inferior organisms to vegetables. We hold, then, that
we are justified in using the word _zoophyte_ to designate the beings
which now occupy our attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall not surprise our readers by telling them that the structure of
the zoophyte, especially in its inferior orders, is excessively simple.
They are the first steps in the scale of animal life, and in them a
purely rudimentary organization was to be expected. In these
beings--true types of animal life--the several parts of the body, in
place of being disposed in pairs on each side of its longitudinal plane,
as occurs in animals of a higher organization, are found to radiate
habitually round an axis or central point, and this whether in its adult
or juvenile state. Zoophytes have not generally an articulate skeleton,
either exterior or interior, and their nervous system, where it exists,
is very slightly developed. The organs of the senses, other than those
of touch, are altogether absent in the greater part of beings which
belong to this, the lowest class of the last division of the animal
kingdom.

Several questions arise here: Has the zoophyte sentiment, feeling,
perception? Has it consciousness, sense, sensibility? The question is
insoluble; it is an abyss of obscurity. The coral, or rather the
aggregation of living beings which bear the name, are attached to the
rock which has seen their birth, and which will witness their death: the
infusoria, of microscopic dimensions, which revolve perpetually in a
circle infinitesimally small; the Amoebæ, the marvellous Proteus, which
in the space of a minute changes its form a hundred times under the
surprised eyes of the observer, are, in truth, mere atoms charged with
life. Yet all these beings have an existence to appearance purely
vegetative. In their obscure and blind impulse, have they consciousness
or instinct? Do they know what takes place at the three-thousandth part
of an inch from their microscopic bodies? To the Creator alone does the
knowledge of this mystery belong.

It would be foreign to the object of this work to enter into minute
division of the innumerable creatures which swarm on the ocean and on
its confines. We shall perhaps best consult the convenience of our
readers by adopting the following simple arrangement of these animals
into

I. PROTOZOA, including the _Spongiadæ_, _Infusoria_, and _Foraminifera_.

II. POLYPIFERA, including the _Hydræ_, _Sertularia_, and _Pennatulariæ_.

III. ECHINODERMATA, or Sea-urchins and Star-fishes.

Our space will prevent our doing more than presenting to the reader in
succession the most characteristic types of each of these groups.


I. THE PROTOZOA.

The Protozoares represent animal life reduced to its most simple
expression. They are organized atoms, mere animated and moving points,
living sparks. As they are the simplest forms of animal life as regards
their structure, so also they are the smallest. Their microscopic
dimensions hide them from our view. The discovery of the microscope was
a necessary step to our becoming acquainted with these beings, whose
existence was ignored by the ancient world, and only revealed in the
seventeenth century by the discovery of the microscope. When armed with
this marvellous instrument, applied to examine the various liquid
mediums--as when Leuwenhoek, for example, applied the magnifying glass
to the inspection of stagnant water, with its infusions of macerated
vegetable and animal substances--when he scrutinized a drop of water
borrowed from the ocean, from rivers, or from lakes, he discovered there
a new world--a world which will be unveiled in these pages.

Some modern writers believe that the Protozoa is a mere _cellular
organism_, that being the principle and end of organization, such as we
find it in the cellular vegetable. According to this hypothesis, the
Protozoares would be the cellulars of the animal kingdom, as the Algæ
and Mushrooms are of the vegetable world. This idea is so far wrong,
that it has been founded upon the empire of pure theory. "In reality,"
says Paul Gervais and Van Beneden, "the animals to which we extend it
very rarely resemble elementary cellulars." The tissue of which the
bodies of the Protozoa are composed is habitually destitute of cellular
structure. They are formed of a sort of animated jelly, amorphous and
diaphanous, and have received from Dujardin the name of _Sarcoda_, or
soft-fleshed animals.

Infinitely varied in their form, the Protozoares are furnished with
_vibratile cilia_, which are organs of locomotion belonging to the lower
animals inhabiting the liquid element. Their bodies are sometimes naked,
sometimes covered with a siliceous, chalky, or membranous cuirass. They
are divided into two great classes, the _Rhizopoda_ and _Infusoria_.


SPONGIA.

The Sponge is a natural production, which has been known from times of
the highest antiquity. Aristotle, Pliny, and all other writers who
occupied themselves with natural history in ancient times, are agreed in
according to it a sensitive life. They recognize the curious fact that
the sponge evades the hand which tries to seize it, and clings to the
rocks on which it is rooted, as if it would resist the efforts made to
detach it. Pliny, Dioscorides, and their commentators, even formed the
idea that sponges were capable of feeling, that they adhered to their
native rock by special force, and that they shrunk from the hand which
tried to seize them. They even distinguished males from females.
Erasmus, however, criticising Pliny, concludes that he may pass over all
he has written upon the sponge. The sponge, in short, was to the
ancients something between a plant and an animal.

Rondelet, the friend of the celebrated Rabelais, whom the merry curate
of Meudon designated under the name of _Rondibilis_, who was himself a
physician and naturalist of Montpellier, denied at first the existence
of sensibility in sponges. He originated the idea that these productions
belonged to the vegetable world--an idea which Tournefort, Gaspard
Bauhin, Rey, and even Linnæus, in the first editions of his "Systema
Naturæ," supported by the great authority of their names. Afterwards,
influenced by the convincing labours of Trembley and some other
observers, Linnæus withdrew the sponges from the vegetable world. He
satisfied himself, in short, that certain polypiers much resembled
sponges in the nature of their parenchyma, and that, on the other hand,
the assimilation of sponges with plants was not such as could be
maintained. Neuremberg, Peyssonnel, and Trembley maintain the animal
nature of sponges, and their views are adopted by Linnæus, Guettard,
Donati, Lamouroux, and Ehrenberg on the Continent, and by Ellis,
Fleming, and Grant in England. They live at the bottom of the seas in
five to twenty-five fathoms of water, among the clefts and crevices of
the rocks, always adhering and attaching themselves, not only to
inorganic bodies, but even growing on vegetables and animals, spreading,
erect, or pendent, according to the body which supports them and their
natural habit.

The power of fixing themselves to other objects, which certain animals
possess, is very singular. Nevertheless, it is certain that whole tribes
exist consisting of innumerable strictly adherent species, which live
and die attached to some rock or other object; and among these are all
polypiers, such as the sponges and corallines. It follows that they are
wholly dependent on external agencies for their means of existence. "The
poor little creatures," says Alfred Frédol, "receive their nourishment
from the wave which washes past them; they inhale and respire the bitter
water all their lives; they are insensible to that which is only the
hundredth part of an inch from their mouth."

In the months of April and May, these animalcules engender germs, round,
yellow, or white, whence proceed certain ovoid granular embryos
furnished towards their largest extremity with small vibratile cilia.
They are thrown off by the currents, which serve as a stomach, and form
swarms of larvæ round the polypier. They swim about with a gliding wavy
motion, and when they have been some time in the water they usually come
to the surface; but they are also often carried off by the current.
During two or three days they seem to seek a convenient place to fix
themselves. Once fixed, the larvæ loses the cilia, spreads itself out,
and takes the form of a flattened gelatinous disk.

Its interior organization consists of contractile cellules and numerous
spiculæ--"a tribe," says Gosse, "of the most debateable forms of life,
long denied a right to stand in the animal ranks at all, and even still
admitted there doubtingly and grudgingly by some excellent naturalists.
Yet such they certainly are, established beyond reasonable controversy
as true and proper examples of animal life."

It may, then, be safely asserted that all naturalists are now satisfied
of the animal nature of sponges, although they represent the lowest and
most obscure grade of animal existence, and that so close to the
confines of the vegetable world, that it is difficult in some species to
determine whether they are on the one side or the other. "Several of
them, however," says Mr. Gosse, "if viewed with a lens under water while
in a living state, display vigorous currents constantly pouring forth
from certain orifices; and we necessarily infer that the water thus
ejected must be constantly taken in through some other channel. On
tearing the mass open, we see that the whole substance is perforated in
all directions by irregular canals, leading into each other, of which
some are slender, and communicate with the surface by minute but
numerous pores, and others are wide, and open by ample orifices; through
the former the water is admitted, through the latter it is ejected." It
is not to be denied, however, that these beings constitute, in spite of
investigations of modern naturalists, a group still somewhat
problematical, and still very imperfectly known as regards their
internal organization.

Sponges are masses of a light elastic tissue, which is, at the same
time, resistant, full of air-cells, and with much varied exterior
arrangements. Nearly three hundred species are known, the different
appearances of which have been characterised by names more or less
singular. There is, for instance, the Feather Sponge, the Fan Sponge,
the Bell, the Lyre, the Trumpet, the Distaff, the Peacock Tail, and
Neptune's Glove.

There are river sponges and sea sponges.

The first are irregular and arenaceous masses, which pile themselves
upon plants and solid bodies immerged in fresh water. Such are the
_spongilles_, upon which anatomic and embryonic observations have very
frequently been made in relation to the group more immediately under
consideration.

The second is found in almost every sea; especially are they found in
the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Mexican Gulf. Affecting warm and
quiet waters, they attach themselves to bold and rugged rocks at depths
ranging from five to twenty-five fathoms. They are erect, pendent, or
spreading, according to their form or position. Fig. 10, drawn from
Nature, represents a very remarkable form of sponge, which was fished up
in sixty fathoms.

The sponge is very common in the Mediterranean and round the Grecian
Archipelago, and is known vulgarly under the name of the Marine
Mushroom, the Sailor's Nest, and the fine soft sponge of Syria. It is a
mass more or less rounded, covered with a mucous bed, glutinous above,
formed of a light elastic but resisting tissue full of gaps, and
riddled with air-cells. This tissue is formed of delicate flexible
fibres, uniting in all directions by anastomosis, but presenting
numerous pores, which are formed by what is termed osculation, having
irregular _conduits_ which connect them. In this tissue certain very
small solid bodies are discovered, named _spiculæ_. The _spiculæ_ are
siliceous or calcareous in their nature, varying according to the
species, and sometimes varying even in the same species. Some of these
resemble needles, others are pin-like, and others again resemble very
small stars.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. Spongia, half the natural size, attached to its
rocky bed.]

The physiological function of those tubes and orifices which present
themselves on all parts of the sponge has been interpreted in various
ways. Ellis, writing in 1765, supposes that they were the orifices of
the cells occupied by the polypi. In 1816, Lamarck still advocated this
opinion; and even now we find the observer, whose notes M. Frédol has
edited with so much judgment, asserting that "the inhabitants of the
sponge are a species of fleeting, transparent, gelatinous tube,
susceptible of extension and contraction; young polypes, as we may call
them, without consistence, without cilia; incipient polypes, in short,
of very simple but sufficient organization. The animalcule of the sponge
is a stomach, without arms, very simple, very elementary--in short, an
animal all stomach!"

This mode of considering the sponge is not conformable to the views of
the leaders of modern science, however. Mr. Milne Edwards, for instance,
in place of seeing in the sponge a collection of united beings, forming
as it were a colony, considers each to be an isolated being, an unique
individual. The innumerable canals by which the sponge is traversed,
according to that author, are at once the digestive organs and breathing
pores of the zoophyte. The vibratile cilia are necessary to the renewed
aeration of the water required as a respiratory fluid in the interior
canals of the sponge. The currents in these channels have one constant
direction. The water penetrates the sponge by numerous orifices of
minute dimensions and irregular disposition; it traverses channels in
the body of the zoophyte, which reunite somewhat like the root of a
plant, in order to constitute the trunk and increase its substance;
finally, the water makes its escape by special openings. According to
this view, the channels of the sponge have a kind of cumulative
physiology, performing the two functions of digestion and respiration.
The rapid currents of aerated water which traverse them lead into them
the substances necessary to the nourishment of these strange creatures,
rejecting all excremental matter. At the same time, the walls of these
canals present a large absorbing surface which separates the oxygen with
which the water is charged, and disengages the carbonic acid which
results from respiration.

Sponges contain true eggs, from which embryo polyps are produced; these
have not cilia at first. In the interior of these eggs the contractile
cellules have their birth; then the spiculæ; and when they are finally
covered with the vibratile cilia, aided by them these larvæ of ovoid
form swim, or rather glide, through the water. The species of infusoria
born of the sponge resemble the larvæ of various polypes at the moment
they issue from the egg. "They soon attach themselves to some foreign
body," says Mr. Milne Edwards, "and become henceforth immovable; no
longer giving signs either of sensibility or of contractibility, while
in their enlargement they are completely transformed. The gelatinous
substance of their bodies is channeled and riddled with holes--the
fibrous framework is completed--the sponge is formed."

We may add, however, that other zoologists, and among them MM. Paul
Gervais and Van Beneden, take a different view of the development of the
sponges, and Dr. Johnston omits them altogether from his great work on
"British Zoophytes." "If they are not the production of polypi," he
says, "the zoologist who retains them in his province must contend that
they are individually animals, an opinion to which I cannot assent,
seeing that they have no animal structure or individual organs, and
exhibit not one function usually supposed to be characteristic of the
animal kingdom." Gervais and Van Beneden consider, as Milne Edwards
does, that the embryos are at first movable, then fixed, many of them
uniting together, and melting, as it were, into one common colony, which
become a sponge, such as we see it. An isolated embryo might also, by
throwing out germs, produce a similar colony, which would thus become a
product of agamous generation. Thus it appears that Science is far from
being settled in its views as to the organization and development of
these obscure and complex formations; nor is it more advanced in its
knowledge of the duration of life and the quickness of growth in
sponges. It is agreed, however, on one point--namely, that the
sponge-fisher may return to the same fishing-ground after three years
from the last fishing. At the present time sponge-fishing takes place
principally in the Grecian Archipelago and the Syrian _littoral_. The
Greeks and Syrians sell the product of their fishing to the Western
nations, and the trade has been immensely extended in recent times, when
the sponge has become an almost necessary adjunct of the toilet as well
as the stable, and in other cleansing operations.

Fishing usually commences towards the beginning of June on the coast of
Syria, and finishes at the end of October. But the months of July and
August are peculiarly favourable to the sponge harvest, if we may use
the term. Latakia furnishes about ten boats to the fishery, Batroun
twenty, Tripoli twenty-five to thirty, Kalki fifty, Simi about a hundred
and seventy to a hundred and eighty, and Kalminos more than two hundred.
The operations of one of these boats fishing for sponges on the Syrian
coast is represented in Plate II.

The boat's crew consists of four or five men, who scatter themselves
along the coast for two or three miles in search of sponges under the
cliffs and ledges of rock. Sponges of inferior quality are gathered in
shallow waters. The finer kinds are found only at a depth of from twelve
to twenty fathoms. The first are fished for with three-toothed harpoons,
by the aid of which they are torn from their native rock; but not
without deteriorating them more or less. The finer kinds of sponges, on
the other hand, are collected by divers aided by a knife; they are
carefully detached. Thus the price of a sponge brought up by diving is
much more considerable than that of a harpooned sponge. Among divers,
those of Kalminos and of Psara are particularly renowned. They will
descend to the depth of twenty-five fathoms, remain down a shorter time
than the Syrian divers, and yet bring up a more abundant harvest. The
fishing of the Archipelago furnishes few fine sponges to commerce, but a
great quantity of very common ones. The Syrian fisheries furnish many of
the finer kinds, which find a ready market in France; they are of medium
size. On the other hand, those which are furnished from the Barbary
coast are of great dimensions, of a very fine tissue, and much sought
for in England. On the Bahama banks, and in the Gulf of Mexico, the
sponges grow in water of small depth. The fishermen, Spanish, American,
and English, sink a long mast or perch into the water moored near the
boat, down which they drop upon the sponges; by this means they are
easily gathered.

[Illustration: Plate II.--Sponge Fishing on the Coast of Syria.]

In the Red Sea, the Arabs fish for sponges by diving, their produce
being either sold to the English at Aden or sent to Egypt.
Sponge-fishing is carried on at various other stations in the
Mediterranean, but without any intelligent direction, and in consequence
it is effected without any conservative foresight. At the same time,
however, the trade in this product goes on increasing. But it is only
a question of time when the trade shall cease; the demand which every
year clears the submarine fields of these zoophytes causes such
destruction that their reproduction will soon cease to be equal to the
demand.

In order to prevent this troublesome result, it is very desirable that
the several species of sponges should be naturalized on the French and
Algerian coast, and the cultivation and reproduction of the zoophyte
protected. For this purpose, the rocky coasts of the Mediterranean, from
Cape Cruz to Nice, and round the islands of Corsica and Hyères, in the
Algerian waters, and even some of the salt lakes of the departments near
the Mediterranean, might be utilized. The whole of the Italian littoral
would also be available under the new régime for this purpose.

M. Lamiral considered that the composition of the water of the
Mediterranean being thought the same on the coast of France, of Algeria,
and on the Syrian coast, that the difference of temperature between the
two latitudes--especially at the depth where the sponges flourish
most--would not interfere with the existence of these robust zoophytes,
and that their acclimatization on the coasts of France and Algeria would
be a certain success. He remarked, moreover, that the more the sponges
advanced towards the north, the finer and compacter their tissues
became; and he argued from this fact, that a considerable improvement in
the quality would result from the experiment.

The only difficulty, then, would consist in the transplanting sponges
from Syrian waters to the coasts of France and Algeria. A submarine
boat, such as M. Lamiral makes use of for operations conducted in deep
water, would, according to this naturalist, give every facility for
collecting sponges for the purpose. This boat can descend to great
depths, and its crew can dwell there a considerable time, for it is
continually fed with fresh air from above, which is conveyed by an
air-pump and tube into the interior of the boat, so that the men could
readily select such individuals as were suited for acclimatizing;
removing the blocks of rock along with them, either by placing them in
cases pierced with holes, or by towing them to their new abode.
Everything seems to promise that in the following year the zoophytes
would begin to multiply in their new country.

The larvæ might also be collected in the months of April and May, as
they separate from the parent sponge, and be transplanted to favourable
localities. At the end of three years, when these true submarine fields
would be ripe for harvesting, they could be put in train for methodical
collection by means of diving boats.

The toilet sponge is an article which produces a high price, often as
much as forty shillings the pound for very choice specimens, a price
which few commercial products attain, which prohibits its use, in short,
to all but the wealthy. It is, therefore, very desirable to carry out
the submarine enterprise of M. Lamiral. With the assistance of the
Acclimatization Society of Paris, some experiments have already been
made in this direction--so far without any satisfactory results, it is
true, but everything indicates that by perseverance we shall see the
enterprise crowned by the success it merits.

Such specimens as now reach our ports are chiefly distinguished by their
appearance, quality, and origin.

The fine soft Syrian sponge is distinguished by its lightness, its fine
flaxen colour, its form, which is that of a cup, its surface convex,
voluted, pierced with innumerable small orifices, the concave part of
which presents canals of much greater diameter, which are prolonged to
the exterior surface in such a manner that the summit is nearly always
pierced throughout in many places. This sponge is sometimes blanched by
the aid of caustic substances, acids, or alkalies; but this preparation
shortens its duration and changes its colour. This sponge is specially
employed for the toilet, and its price is high. Those which are
round-shaped, large, and soft, sometimes produce as much as five or six
pounds.

The _Fine Sponge of the Archipelago_ is scarcely distinguishable from
that of Syria, either before or after being cleansed; nevertheless, it
is weightier, its texture is not so fine, and the holes with which it is
pierced are at once larger and less in number. It is nearly of the same
country as the former, in fact, the fishing extending along the Syrian
coast as well as the littoral of Barbary and the Archipelago.

The _Fine Hard Sponge_, called Greek, is less sought for than either of
the preceding; it is useful for domestic and for certain industrial
purposes. Its mass is irregular, its colour fauve; it is hard and
compact, and pierced with small holes.

The _White Sponge of Syria_, called Venetian, is esteemed for its
lightness, the regularity of its form, and its solidity. In its rough
state it is brown in colour, of a fine texture, compact and firm.
Purified, it becomes flaxen and of a looser texture. The orifice of the
great channels which traverse it are edged with rough and bristly hairs.

[Illustration: (From Dr. Grant.)

Fig. 11. _Spongia oculata_, showing the orifices and currents outwards.
2. Anastomosing horny substance of _Spongia communis_. 3. Siliceous
spiculum of _S. papillaris_. 4. Of _S. cineria_. 5. _S. panicea_. 6.
Calcareous spiculum of _S. compressa_. 7. Transverse section of a canal
of _S. papillaris_, showing the structure of the ova passing along the
canal. 8. Ovum of _S. panicea_ seen laterally--the ciliæ anterior. 9.
The same seen on the end, with a circle produced by the ciliary action.
10. Young _Spongia papillaris_.]

The _Brown Barbary Sponge_, called the Marseillaise, when first taken
out of the water, presents itself as an elongated flattened body,
gelatinous, round in shape, and charged with blackish mud. It is then
hard, heavy, coarse, but compact, and of a reddish colour. By a simple
washing in water it becomes round, still remaining heavy and reddish. It
presents many gaps, the intervals of which are occupied by a sinuous and
tenacious network. It is valuable for domestic use, because of the
facility with which it absorbs water, and its great strength.

Other sorts of sponges are very abundant. The _Blonde Sponge_ of the
Archipelago, often confounded with the Venetian; the _Hard Barbary
Sponge_, called Gelina, which only comes by accident into France; the
_Salonica Sponge_ is of middling quality; finally, the _Bahama Sponge_,
from the Antilles, is wanting in flexibility and a little hard, and so
is sold at a low price, having few useful properties to recommend it.

Many species of _Spongia_ are described as inhabiting British seas, but
none of any commercial value. Regarding them as apolypiferous zoophytes,
Dr. Grant has pointed out certain principles of analysis on which they
may be grouped, according to the arrangement of the horny fibres, the
calcareous and siliceous spiculæ, and the distribution and formation of
their pores and orifices.


I. GROUPS OF WHICH THE CONSTITUENT STRUCTURE IS KNOWN.

_Spongia._--Mass soft, elastic, more or less irregular in shape, very
porous, traversed by many tortuous canals, which terminate at the
surface in distinct orifices. Substance of the skeleton cartilaginous,
fibres anastomosed in all directions, without any earthy
spicula.--Example, _S. communis_ (Fig. 11 [2]).

_Calcispongia_ (Blainville).--Mass rigid or slightly elastic, of
irregular form, porous, traversed by irregular canals, which terminate
on the surface in distinct orifices; skeleton cartilaginous, fibres
strengthened by calcareous spicula, often tri-radiate.--Example, _S.
compressa_ (Fig. 11 [6]).

_Halispongia_ (Blainville).--Mass more or less rigid or friable,
irregular, porous, traversed by tortuous irregular canals, which
terminate at the surface in distinct orifices; substance cartilaginous,
fibres strengthened by siliceous spicula, generally fusiform or
cylindrical.--Example, _S. papillaris_ (Grant) (Fig. 11 [3]).

_Spongilla_ (Lamarck).--Mass more or less rigid or friable, irregular,
porous, but not furnished with regular orifices or internal
canals.--Example, _S. fluviatalis_ (Linn.).


II. GROUPS DEPENDING ON CHARACTERS OF SURFACE OR GENERAL FIGURE.

_Geodia_ (Lamarck).--Fleshy mass, tuberous, irregular, hollow within,
externally incrusted by a porous envelope, which bears a series of
orifices in a small tubercular space.--Example, _G. gibberosa_
(Schmeiger).

_Coeloptychium_ (Goldfuss).--Mass fixed, pedicled, the upper part
expanded, agariciform, concave, and radiato-porose above, flat and
radiato-sulcate below; substance fibrous.--Example, _C. agarisidioideum_
(Goldfuss). Fossils from the chalk of Westphalia.

_Siphonia_ (Parkinson).--Mass polymorphous, free or fixed, ramose or
simple, concave or fistulous above, porous at the surface, and
penetrated by anastomosing canals, which terminate in sub-radiating
orifices within the cup.

_Myrmecium_ (Goldfuss).--Mass sub-globular, sessile, of a close fibrous
texture, forming ramified canals which radiate from the base to the
circumference. Summit with a central pit.

_Scyphia_ (Oken).--Mass cylindrical, simple, or branched, fistulous,
ending in a large rounded pit, and composed entirely of a reticulated
tissue.

_Eudea_ (Lamouroux).--Mass filiform, attenuated, sub-pedicellate at one
end, enlarged and rounded at the other, with a large terminal pit;
surface reticulated by irregular lacunæ, minutely porous.

_Halirrhoa_ (Lamouroux).--Mass turbinated, nearly regular, circular, or
lobate; surface porous; a large central pit on the upper face.

_Happalimus_ (Lamouroux).--Mass fungiform, pedicellate below, expanding
conically, with a central pit above; surface porous and irregularly
excavated.

_Cnemidium_ (Goldfuss).--Mass turbinate, sessile, composed of close
fibres and horizontal canals, diverging from the centre to the
circumference; a central pit on the upper surface, cariose in the
exterior and radiate at the margin.

_Ierea_ (Lamouroux).--Mass ovoid, sub-pedicellate, finely porous;
pierced on the upper part by many orifices, the terminations of the
internal tubes.

_Tethium_ (Lamarck).--Mass sub-globose, tuberose, composed of a cariose
firm substance, strengthened by abundance of siliciary spicula,
fasciculated, and diverging from the centre to the circumference.


RHIZOPODA.

Gervais and Van Beneden include under the name of _Rhizopods_, or
_foot-rooted_ animals (so called from ριξα,, _root_; πους,
ποδος, _footed animals_), those of the simplest organization, which
may be characterised by the absence of distinct digestive cavities, and
the presence of vibratile cilia, as well as by the soft parts of their
tissues. This tissue emits prolongations or filaments which admit of
easy extension, sometimes simple, sometimes branching. Occasionally we
see these branching filaments withdraw themselves towards the mass of
the body, disappear, and gradually melt into its substance in such a
manner that the individual seems to absorb and devour itself. If, in
exceptional cases, some of the superior animals, as the wolf, devour
each other, the rhizopods go much farther: they devour themselves, so
to speak!

The rhizopods are found both in fresh and salt water. They live, as
parasites, on the body of worms and other articulated animals. The class
is divided into many orders. We shall speak here only of three, namely,
the _Amoebæ_, _Foraminifera_, and _Noctiluca_.


AMOEBÆ.

In nearly all ancient animal and vegetable infusions, not quite
putrid--upon all oozy beds covering bodies which have remained for some
time in fresh or sea water--we find the singular beings which belong to
this order. They are the simplest organisms in creation, being reduced
to a mere drop of living matter. Their bodies are formed of a gelatinous
substance, without appreciable organization. The quantity of matter
which forms them is so infinitesimal, that it becomes incredibly
diaphanous, and so transparent that the eye, armed with the microscope,
traverses it in all directions, so that it is necessary to modify the
nature of the liquid in which it is held in suspension, and introduce
the phenomenon of refraction in order to observe them.

It would be difficult to say exactly what is the form these creatures
assume. They frequently have the appearance of small rounded masses,
like drops of water; but, whatever their form may be, it is always so
unstable, that it changes, so to speak, every moment, so that it is
found impossible to make a drawing from the model under the
microscope--the design must be finished by an appeal to memory. This
instability is the characteristic manifestation of life in the _Amoebæ_,
which are naked beings, without apparent organization; in fact, they
occupy the first step in the scale of creation.

The transparent immovable drop under consideration emits an expansion,
and a lobe of a vitreous appearance upon its circumference, which,
gliding like a drop of oil upon the object-glass of the microscope,
begins by fixing itself to it as a supporting point, afterwards slowly
attracting to itself the whole mass, and thus gradually increasing its
bulk under the observer's eye.

The _Amoebæ_, according to their dimensions and degree of development,
successively emit a greater or smaller number of lobes, none of which
are precisely alike, but, after having appeared for an instant, each
successively re-enters into the common mass, with which it becomes
completely incorporated. Variable in their respective forms, these lobes
present appearances quite different in the several genera. They are more
or less lengthy, more or less fringed, and often branching; sometimes
they are filiform, sprouting in all directions over the animal mass,
which rolls in the liquid like the husk of a small chestnut.

If we ask how these animals are nourished, in which no digestive
apparatus can be distinguished, the question is difficult to answer. It
is thought that they are nourished by simple absorption, and by
absorption only. In the interior of the gelatinous mass which
constitutes the animals, however, granules and microscopic portions of
vegetables are frequently discovered. "We can conceive," says Dujardin,
"how these objects have penetrated to the interior, if we remark, on the
one hand, that in creeping on the surface of the glass, to which they
adhere very exactly, the _Amœbæ_ can be made to receive, by pressure,
foreign substances into their own bodies, by means of the alternate
contraction and extension of the various parts natural to them, and, on
the other hand, that the gelatinous mass is susceptible of spontaneous
depressions--here and there near to or even at the surface of the
spherical cavities, which successively contract themselves and disappear
in connection with the strange body which they have absorbed."

The _Amoebæ_ are often observed to be tinted red or green; this arises
from the special colouring matter which has been absorbed into its mass.

The question arises, How do these creatures, so simple in their
organization, propagate their species?

We believe that they are chiefly multiplied by parting with a lobe,
which, in certain conditions, is enabled to live an independent
existence, and develop itself, thus forming a new individual. This is
what naturalists term generation by division--_fissiparism_ or
_fission_. The absence of a nutritive and reproductive apparatus in the
_Amoebæ_, and the want of stability in their forms, explain how nearly
impossible it is to characterise as species the numerous individuals
daily met with in infusions of organic matter in stagnant water. In
order to distinguish some of the groups, Dujardin bases his descriptions
upon their size and the general form into which they expand.

We shall be able to form some idea of the appearance of these beings,
rendered mysterious by their very simplicity, by throwing a glance upon
the two accompanying figures (Figs. 12 and 13), borrowed from the Atlas
of Dujardin's great work, "Les Zoophytes Infusoires," which we shall
have occasion to quote more than once.

We have said that the _Amœbæ_ change their form every few moments under
the eyes of the observer. Fig. 13 represents the changes of form through
which they pass, according to Dujardin, when examined under the
microscope.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. Amoebæ princeps (Ehrenberg), magnified 100
times.]

[Illustration: Fig. 13. Various forms of Amoebæ diffluens (Müller),
magnified 400 times.]

Dujardin points out very clearly the identity of structure between
organisms like _Amoebæ_ and such forms as _Difflugia_ and _Arcella_. All
these creatures are without trace of mouth or digestive cavity, and the
entire body is a single cell, or aggregation of cells, which receive
their nutriment by absorption; for, although the creatures have neither
mouth nor stomach, yet, according to Professor Kölliker, they take in
solid nutriment, and reject what is indigestible. When in its progress
through the water one of these minute organisms approaches one of the
equally minute Algæ, from which it draws nourishment, it seizes the
plant with its tentacular filaments, which it gradually encloses on all
sides; the filaments, to all appearance, becoming more or less shortened
in the process. In this way the captive is brought close to the surface
of the body; a cavity is thus formed, in which the prey is lodged, which
closes round it on all sides. In this situation it is gradually drawn
towards the centre, and passes at last entirely into the mass. The
engulfed morsel is gradually dissolved and digested.


FORAMINIFERA.

There is nothing small in Nature. The idea of littleness or greatness is
a human conception--a comparison which is suggested by the dimensions of
his own organs. Nature, on the other hand, compensates smallness by
numbers. The result produced by the bones of some large animals is also
accomplished by the accumulated spoils of millions of animalcules. The
history of the Foraminifera is a striking example of this great truth.

What, then, is a Foraminifer? It is a very small zoophyte, a shell
nearly invisible to the naked eye; for, in general, its dimensions
rarely exceed the two hundredth part of an inch; in short, it is
strictly microscopic. Examine under a microscope the sand of the ocean,
and it will be found that one-half of it consists of the débris of
shells, of various but well-defined forms, each habitually pierced with
a number of holes. To this they are indebted for their name
Foraminifera, from _foramen_, a hole. With these microscopic animalcules
Nature has worked wonders in geological times; nor have the wonders
ceased in our days.

Many beds of the terrestrial crust consist entirely of the remains of
Foraminifera. In the most remote ages in the history of our planet,
these zoophytes must have lived in innumerable swarms in the seas of the
period; they buried themselves in the bottoms of the seas, and their
shells, heaped up during many ages, have finished by forming hills of
great thickness and extent. We may say, to give an example, that during
the Carboniferous period, a single species of these zoophytes has
formed, in Russia alone, enormous beds of calcareous rock. Many beds of
cretaceous formation are, in great part, composed of Foraminifera, and
they exist in immense numbers in the white chalk which covers and forms
the vast mountains ranging from Champagne, in France, nearly to the
centre of England.

But it is to the Tertiary formation that these zoophytes have
contributed the most enormous deposits. The greater part of the Egyptian
pyramids is only an aggregation of _Nummulites_ inserted in the syenite.
A prodigious number of Foraminifera present themselves in the tertiary
deposits of the Gironde, of Italy, and of Austria. The chalk so abundant
in the basin of Paris is almost entirely composed of Foraminifera. The
remains of these creatures are so abundant in the Paris chalk, that M.
d'Orbigny found upwards of fifty-eight thousand in a small block,
scarcely exceeding a cubic inch of chalk, from the quarries of
Chantilly. This fact, according to this author, implies the existence of
three thousand millions of these zoophytes in the cubic mètre
(thirty-nine inches square and a small fraction) of rock! As the chalk
from these quarries has served to build Paris, as well as the towns and
villages of the neighbouring departments, it may be said that Paris, and
other great centres of population which surround it, are built with the
shells of these microscopic animals.

The sand of the littoral of all existing seas is so full of these minute
but elegant shells, that it is often half composed of them. Ehrenberg,
the celebrated German microscopist, was recently invited by the Prussian
government to assist in tracing the robbery of a special case of wine.
It had been repacked in littoral sand only found in an ancient sea-board
in Germany. The criminal was thus detected. M. d'Orbigny found in three
grammes (forty-six grains troy) of sand from the Antilles, four hundred
and forty thousand shells of Foraminifera. Bianchi found in thirty
grammes (four hundred and sixty-seven grains) from the Adriatic, six
thousand of these shells. If we calculate the proportion of these beings
contained in a cubic mètre alone of sea-sand, we reach a figure which
passes all conception. What would this be if we could extend the
calculation to the immensity of surface covered by the waves which
surround the globe?

M. d'Orbigny has satisfied himself, by microscopic examination of sands
from all parts of the globe, that it is the débris of Foraminifera which
form, in all existing seas, those enormous deposits which raise banks,
obstruct the navigation in gulfs and straits, and fill up ports, as may
be seen in the port of Alexandria. In common with the corals and
madrepores, the Foraminifera are the great agents in forming the isles
which surge up under our eyes from the bosom of the ocean in the warmer
regions of the globe. Thus shells, scarcely appreciable to the sight,
suffice by their accumulations to fill up seas, while performing a very
considerable part in the great operations of Nature, although it may not
be apparent to us.

Our exact knowledge of the Foraminifera is of very recent date. Great
numbers of minute particles, of regular and symmetrical form, were long
distinguished on the sands of the sea shore. These corpuscular atoms
early attracted the attention of observers. But with the discovery of
the microscope, these small elegant shells, which were among the
curiosities revealed by the instrument, assumed immense importance. We
have stated that these corpuscles are nothing but the shell or solid
framework of a crowd of marine animalculæ: we may then consider them as
living species analogous to the Ammonites and Nautilus of geological
times. Linnæus has placed them in this last genus, which would include,
according to that author, all the multilocular shells. In 1804, Lamarck
classed them among the molluscous cephalopods. But Alcide d'Orbigny, who
has devoted long years to study and observation, and may be considered
the great historian of the Foraminifera, makes it appear that this mode
of classification was inexact. Dujardin separated them altogether from
the class of mollusks, and showed that they ought to be consigned to an
inferior class of animals. These minute creatures, in short, are
deficient in the true appendages analogous to feet, which exist in the
higher mollusks. They simply possess filamentous expansions, very
variable in their form.

We have stated that the Foraminifera are of microscopic dimensions. With
some trifling exceptions, this is generally true; but there exist a
number of species which are visible to the naked eye. The Foraminifers
found in the nummulite formation of Tremsted, in Bavaria, between Munich
and Saltzberg, are still larger, being nearly double the size of the
nummulite of the Pyramids; in short, they are the giants of this tribe
of animals.

After these remarks, we may venture to give some idea of the structure
and classification of these beings, whose part in the work of creation
has, in former times, been so considerable.

The bodies of the Foraminifera are formed of a gelatinous substance,
sometimes entire and round, sometimes divided into segments, which can
be placed upon a line, simple or alternate, wound up into a spiral form
or rolled round its axis, like a ball. A testaceous envelope, modelled
upon the segments, follows the various modifications of form, and
protects the body in all its parts. From the extremity of the last
segment of one or many openings of the shell, or of the numerous pores,
issue certain long and slender filaments, more or less numerous, which
are divided and subdivided over their whole length, like the spreading
branches of a tree. They can attach themselves to external bodies with
force enough to determine the progression of the animal. Being formed of
transparent non-colouring matter, they may be said to be mere
expansions, which vary in form and length according to the conditions of
the ambient medium. The filaments have also very variable positions:
sometimes they form an unique and retractile band, issuing from a single
opening; sometimes they project themselves across from numerous little
pores in the shell, which covers the last segment of the animal. These
pores, or openings, give the name to the creatures under consideration.

In conclusion, the filaments, contractile and variable in their form,
which constitute the feet and arms of these little creatures, appear to
have something electric in them: it is stated that the Infusoria are at
once paralysed in their motions when brought in contact with the minute
arms of the Foraminifera. "It is probably by this means," says M.
Frédol, "that these creatures succeed in catching their prey. Is it not
worthy of remark that these beings, however small their size and slight
their form, are unpitying flesh-eaters? The smallest, the weakest, and
the most microscopic animal in existence thus becomes, by means of a
homœopathic dose of poison, a most formidable destroyer."

Another singular observation on these little filaments or arms we owe to
Dujardin. This naturalist observed that, when a _miliola_ attempted to
climb up the walls or sides of a vase, it could improvise, as it were,
on the instant, and at the expense of its own substance, a provisional
foot, which stretched itself out rapidly and performed all the functions
of a permanent member. The occasion served, this temporary foot seemed
once more to return to the common mass, and was absorbed into the body.
It would thus appear that with these minute creatures the presence of a
necessity gives the power to create an organ by the mere will of the
creature, while man, with all his genius, cannot manufacture a hair. To
the present day, however, we have not been able to discover any organ of
nutrition in the Foraminifera; they have no stomach, properly so called,
but Nature has gifted them with a peculiar tissue, at once gelatinous
and contractile, and essentially simulative, which probably serves the
same purpose.

We have already said that the shells of these minute zoophytes vary much
in form. They are generally many-chambered, each chamber communicating
by pores in the walls; the different gelatinous parts of the animalcules
are, in this manner, placed in continual communication with each other.
Alcide d'Orbigny, to whom we owe almost all that is known of the class,
has distributed them into six families, making the form of the shell the
basis of their arrangement. These six families include sixty genera, and
more than sixteen hundred species, the families being as follows:--

I. Monostega.--Animals consisting of a single segment. Shell of a single
chamber.

II. Stichostega.--Animal in segments, arranged in a single line. Shell
in chambers, superimposed linearly on a straight or curved axis.

III. Helicostega.--Animal in segments, spirally arranged. Chambers piled
or superimposed on one axis, forming a spiral erection. In Fig. 21 we
have a horizontal section of _Faujasina_, in which the spiral
convolutions are visible on the truncated half of the shell.

IV. Entomostega.--Animal composed of alternating segments forming a
spiral. Chambers superimposed on two alternating axes, also forming a
spiral.

V. Enallostega.--Animal formed of alternate segments. Non-spiral
chambers disposed alternately along two or three axes, also non-spiral.

VI. Agathistega.--Animal formed of segments wound round an axis.
Chambers formed round a common axis, each investing half the
circumference.

The simplest form of Foraminifera is illustrated by Fig. 14 (_Orbulina
universa_), which is a small spherical shell, having a lateral aperture,
the interior of which has been occupied by the living jelly, to which
the shell owes its existence. In the second order, the shell (Fig. 15),
_Dentalina communis_, advances beyond this simple type by a process of
linear budding, the first cell being spherical, with an opening through
which a second segment is formed, generally a little larger than the
first. This new growth is successively followed by others developed in
the same way, until the organism attains its maturity, when it exhibits
a series of cells arranged end on end, in a slightly curved line.

In the next group the gemmation takes a spiral bias, producing the
nautilus shape which misled the earlier naturalists. In some cases all
the convolutions are visible, as in _Operculina_ (Fig. 16). In others,
the external convolute conceals those previously formed, as in
_Nummulitis lenticularis_ (Fig. 17), _Cassidulina_ (Fig. 18),
_Textilaria_ (Fig. 19), and _Alveolina oblonga_, d'Orbigny (Fig. 25),
the latter forming part of the eocene formation in the quartz and
greystone rocks of the neighbourhood of Paris; one figure representing
the shell entire, and the other a vertical section, while the small
figure between represents it in its natural size.

[Illustration: Fig. 14. Orbulina universa.]

[Illustration: Fig. 15. Dentalina communis.]

[Illustration: Fig. 16. Operculina.]

[Illustration: Fig. 17. Nummulitis lenticularis.]

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Cassidulina.]

[Illustration: Fig. 19. Textilaria.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20. Spiroloculina.]

In the fourth group the shell is spiral, with the chamber equilateral,
with a larger and smaller side, the position being alternately reversed
as the segments are multiplied, as in _Cassidulina_ (Fig. 18). In the
succeeding group the new segments are arranged alternately on opposite
sides of the central line, as in _Textilaria_ (Fig. 19), thus forming
two alternating non-spiral parallel segments, each connected by a single
orifice.

The sixth family differ entirely in appearance and structure from the
other Foraminifera. They are more opaque than the other orders, having a
resemblance to white porcelain, which presents a rich amber-brown hue
when viewed by transmitted light. They are more or less oblong, each new
segment being nearly equal to the entire length of the shell, so that
the terminal orifice presents itself alternately at its opposite
extremities, sometimes in one uniform plane, as in _Spiroloculina_ (Fig.
20), and _Faujasina_ (Fig. 21). At other times each new segment, instead
of being exactly opposite each other, is a little on one side.

[Illustration: Fig. 21. Faujasina.]

Professor Williamson has shown that the shell enclosing each new segment
is at first very thin; but as additional calcareous chambers are formed,
each addition not only encases the new gemmation of the soft animal, but
extends over all the exterior of the previously formed shell. The exact
manner in which this is accomplished is doubtful; but the Professor
thinks it probable that the soft animal has the power of diffusing its
substance over the shell, and thus depositing upon its surface
additional layers of calcareous matter.

The fossil Foraminifera are chiefly distinguished from recent and
existing species by the size of the former. While the living forms range
from one-fourth to the one-hundredth part of an inch, the tertiary
strata abound in examples of _Nummulites_ varying from the eighth of an
inch to the size of half-a-crown. The engraving is a drawing from
Nature, by MM. d'Archaic and Haime, of a piece of nummulitic rock, of
Nousse, in the Landes, in which a great variety of sizes and forms are
exhibited.

The Nummulina belong to the third family, or Helicostega, in which the
outer convolutions completely embrace the earlier-formed ones. Hence it
is only by making microscopic sections, or thin slices, that their
structure can be fully seen. When such a section is carried horizontally
through the centre of the shell, the segments present a spiral
arrangement, which, like the convolutions, are remarkable for their
small size, and consequent great number.

[Illustration: Fig. 22. Nummulites Rouaulti (d'Archaic and J. Haime).]

[Illustration: Fig. 23. Siderolites calcitrapoides (Lamarck). Natural
size and magnified.]

With respect to the distribution of the Foraminifera according to
geological periods, we may briefly state that they have been found in
every formation from the Silurian to the Tertiary. The species, at first
very simple in their forms, begin to appear in increasing numbers in the
carboniferous formations. They become more numerous, and, at the same
time, more complex in their forms, in the Cretaceous period; they are
still more diversified, and appear to have multiplied much more rapidly
in the Tertiary period, where they attain the maximum of their numerical
development. In the celebrated quarries of St. Peter, at Maestrecht, the
_Siderolites calcitrapoides_ of Lamarck are found in the upper chalk
(Fig. 23). In the calcareous formation of Chaussy, in the Seine and Oise
district, and other parts of the Paris basin, the _Fabularia
discolithes_ (Fig. 24) of Defrance is found. Finally, the _Dactylopora
cylindracea_ of Lamarck (Fig. 26) is found in the eocene formation of
Valmondois and in the chalk of Grignon. At first, this little creature
was thought to be a polype; but d'Orbigny, in his "Prodrome de
Paleontologie," has placed it among the Foraminifera, thinking that it
appeared to occupy a place between the two classes.

[Illustration: Fig. 24. Fabularia discolithes (Defrance). Natural size
and magnified.]

[Illustration: Fig. 25. Alveolina oblonga (d'Orbigny). Natural size and
magnified.]

[Illustration: Fig. 26. Dactylopora cylindracea (Lamarck). Natural size
and magnified.]

The existing Foraminifera are by no means equally distributed in every
ocean. Some genera belong to warm countries, others to temperate and
cold climates. They are much more numerous, however, and much more
varied in their forms, in warm than in cold climates, and, we may add,
larger also, for Sir E. Belcher brought a recent species from Borneo
which measured two inches in diameter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before passing on to the study of the Infusoria, a few words may be
offered on the _Noctiluca_, a genus of anim